---
title: "Future"
date: 2018-02-08T13:59:32-06:00
draft: true
Weight: 10
---
The overall picture of the Champaign-Urbana region today reveals a regional
transportation system that is able to serve its residents, businesses, and
visitors for a variety of purposes, mobility needs, desires, and abilities. The
region’s transportation system is redeveloping to include more complete streets,
which has helped increase the bicycle and pedestrian infrastructure
significantly. Its public transportation system is one of the largest in the
nation in terms of ridership for a community of its size. CUUATS is also
currently carrying out a large-scale sidewalk assessment in order to inventory
the region’s sidewalk conditions and ADA compliance for future improvements.

Land use patterns, employment and population, environmental concerns, and trends
in travel patterns are all likely to create different demands on the region’s
transportation system. The Sustainable Choices 2040 vision for the future
attempts to take these projected changes into consideration and create a general
vision for the region’s transportation network. The vision presented in this
chapter is based on the concepts and ideas discussed in Chapter 8 Planning
Pillars. The vision is also broken out into two categories to make clear which
transportation projects are illustrative and which are fiscally constrained.

The existing conditions section provides an overview of the current condition of
the urbanized area and Metropolitan Planning Area (MPA). In order to make
positive changes for the future of the community, it is important to look at
where we are and where we would like to be in 25 years. This chapter looks at
each mode of transportation discussed in the existing conditions report and
describes ways in which the current transportation system can change and adapt
between 2015 and 2040. The changes discussed in this chapter are guided by the
six planning pillars that resulted from the existing conditions analysis and the
public input analysis and are reflected in the goals, objectives, performance
measures, and strategies listed in Chapter 9.

By the year 2040, Champaign-Urbana urbanized area’s population, currently at
about 145,000, is projected to increase by another 50,000- 55,000 residents. In
addition, the urbanized area is projected to add as many as 60,000 more people
to its labor force as the region continues to recover and grow economically.
Those increases represent significant additional pressure on our existing
transportation infrastructure.

In view of the projected increase in travel demand, local agencies, area
residents, and developers need to continue to be thoughtful about land
development and redevelopment in relation to the overall impacts on
accessibility and mobility, keeping in mind the myriad impacts mobility and the
transportation system have on our financial stability, safety, and health as
discussed in the previous chapters. Automobiles continue to be the most
prevalent form of personal transportation. However, as mentioned in Chapter 7,
approximately 24% of the pavement in our roadway network is currently
unacceptable because the financial requirements to maintain, rehabilitate, and
replace the aging parts of the existing urbanized area roadway network are far
greater than the funding currently available. Current funding levels are even
less likely to keep the system functioning at an acceptable level for the needs
of the future. Perhaps the greatest challenge for 2040 will be to identify
stable, longterm sources of transportation funds.

High gas prices and the pressing need to reduce greenhouse gas emissions are
forcing our residents to examine how they travel. Public input revealed that
area residents have a desire to reduce the amount of energy they consume for
transportation and decrease our collective dependence on fossil fuels in order
to achieve greater economic and political stability as well as to reduce the
negative environmental impact of fossil fuel consumption. Numbers show that
fewer people own cars in 2012 than they did in 2009 (Chapter 7). In addition,
trends show people between the ages of 18 and 34 prioritize owning a computer or
smart phone over owning a car1. As a result, this same demographic has higher
rates of walking, biking, and using public transportation than in years past2,
which could justify significantly increased investments in building up the
active transportation network over the automobile network if those trends
continue. The combination of these factors as well as the recentlyestablished
priority to combat the obesity epidemic by the Champaign- Urbana Public Health
District (Chapter 6), forces transportation planners to re-evaluate the
disproportionate amount of transportation funds that are devoted to automobile
infrastructure compared to investments in infrastructure for active modes of
transportation.

## Land Use Development

The municipalities within the urbanized area have seen how the typical suburban
style development patterns of the last 50 years can create unsustainable ways
for growing a community. It can be tempting to expand new development in fringe
areas given the availability of green fields and farm land in Central Illinois.
The new development taking place along the fringe tends to be single-family
subdivisions with small multi-family and/ or commercial components. Although
municipalities collect taxes from these developments, their location on the
fringe means that services and roadway improvements need to be extended beyond
current service areas and oftentimes upgraded to increase capacity. In many
cases, the costs associated with service and roadway upgrades are significantly
higher than the tax revenues generated by the new development. Over time, this
development pattern can lead to a backlog of needed improvements in areas of new
growth.

In order to avoid inefficient and costly development on the fringe of the
community, one of the goals stated in the previous LRTP, Choices 2035, was to
increase gross densities in urban residential areas by 2035. As it was shown in
Chapter 4, residential densities in Champaign, Savoy and Bondville grew between
2009 and 2011, while Urbana’s density decreased slightly from 2010, as its
expanding land area outpaced population growth.

With the recent increases in the price of gasoline, younger generations looking
to live in urban environments, decreasing interest in personal car ownership in
the region and the nation, and the high costs of service and transportation
improvements, suburban development is becoming more costly and unpopular. While
it may be unrealistic to halt fringe development completely, there are
alternative development patterns and policy decisions that could be used to
develop land in a more efficient, economical, and environmentally friendly way.
In addition, as new development places additional stress on the existing
transportation network, it is important to have that development contribute to
the costs associated with transportation and other infrastructure improvements,
generally referred to as ‘impact fees.’

By the year 2040, the prospect of filling a vehicle with gasoline may not be a
possibility for many area residents, either due to the cost or the availability
of fuel. Daily trips to work, school or the grocery store may require the use of
other transportation modes besides a personal vehicle. Both Champaign and Urbana
have already begun thinking about how future development should function with
the possibility of reductions in personal vehicle travel and an increased
reliance on walking, biking, and transit. The Champaign and Urbana Comprehensive
Plans and the Urbana Downtown Plan also reference goals regarding the
encouragement of compact and infill development in order to maximize the utility
of existing infrastructure. The idea of using strategically placed nodes of
mixed-use higher density development has been proposed in the Champaign
Transportation Master Plan, the Staley/Rising Corridor Study, and the University
Avenue Corridor Study. The nodal development pattern integrates housing,
employment, commercial needs, and open space into existing and future suburban
development. Nodes can also provide daily service needs within walking and
biking distance and can be located on transit lines. The higher-density nodes
reduce the need for large expanses of single-family subdivisions by integrating
higher population densities in mixed-use multi-family clusters. The nodal
development pattern’s advantages are not limited to fringe and greenfield
development. It can also be used to target infill parcels and areas of
redevelopment within the urbanized area. The Champaign Transportation Master
Plan and the University Avenue Corridor Study both propose using nodes of higher
density mixed-use development where infill parcels are available and in areas
where redevelopment can bring new housing and employment options. Keeping
development patterns compact and accessible by multiple modes of transportation
will slow land consumption and help grow the urbanized area more efficiently and
cost-effectively.

### Sustainable Development and Green Infrastructure

With issues of global climate change, greenhouse gas emissions, and breaking
away from fossil fuel dependence at the forefront of planning discussions, it is
important to be aware of different ways local agencies can support sustainable
development and green infrastructure. Local agencies have already taken many
different steps to incorporate issues around sustainability in their policies
and decision-making practices. The City of Champaign approved a city-wide
sustainability plan in 2013, and the City of Urbana and the University of
Illinois both passed Climate Action Plans in the past five years.

Compact development that is served by a multi-modal transportation network can
provide options to residents who wish to travel using active modes of
transportation and/or mass transit. Land use and transportation planning must go
hand in hand when laying out future development in order to make it efficient
and accessible. As alternative energy sources, like solar panels and wind
turbines, become more affordable to the everyday home owner, ordinances must be
put in place to allow for such structures on homes or individual parcels of
land. Champaign County recently adopted a wind turbine ordinance to allow for
certain portions of the county to be developed as large wind farms. Household
solar panels and wind turbines can offset the electricity purchased from large
utility companies, therefore reducing our dependence on fossil fuels.

Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) and LEEDNeighborhood
Development (LEED-ND) are two additional tools that can be used by developers
and municipalities to ensure sustainable and environmentally friendly
developments are occurring in the urbanized area. Municipalities should
encourage developers to achieve LEED standards where possible to help reduce
negative environmental effects as a result of new construction.

Water issues, particularly those involving groundwater recharge and water
pollution, can also be mitigated through better development practices. Reducing
the amount of impervious surface on a development site can greatly improve the
recharge rate of rainwater back into the aquifers. Using green roofs, storm
water detention facilities and pervious materials for the pavement of driveways
and parking lots will all help infiltration rates. Compact development designs
can also help reduce the amount of impervious surface by clustering development
and reserving more area for green space. New development should also avoid
building in floodplain and wetland areas so as to not disturb the natural
drainage paths of surface water or the natural habitats these area provide to
flora and fauna.

It is important that development patterns and transportation improvements take a
proactive approach and plan for a future where the availability of land, natural
resources, and fossil fuels may be limited. If land use and transportation
decisions are made in a coordinated manner, they will result in more effective
plans and a more efficient transportation network.

## Future Transportation Systems
In order to accommodate future population and employment growth in the urbanized
area, the existing and future transportation network must become more efficient
not only for automobiles but also for pedestrians, bicyclists, transit riders,
rail commuters, and airplane passengers. This section will discuss each
transportation mode existing in the urbanized area and how improvements can be
implemented to accommodate all users.

### Pedestrians
Along with biking, walking for purposes other than recreation continues to be a
popular active mode of transportation in the urbanized area. For the most part,
sidewalks are readily accessible in places where development already exists and
both Champaign and Urbana have ordinances in place requiring sidewalks on at
least one side of the street for new development. In addition, the City of
Champaign recently completed a pedestrian plan that outlines areas for
improvements and strategic investments that could be made to increase pedestrian
safety, access, and enjoyment. Sidewalks need to be installed in areas where
piecemeal development has created gaps in sidewalk connectivity to create a
continuous network. CUUATS staff is currently working on a sidewalk assessment
project for the entire urbanized area in order to have a more comprehensive
inventory of the sidewalk network, including material, width, crossslope,
surface condition, obstructions, pavement faults, grade, and areas not in
compliance with current ADA regulations, in order to better prioritize future
improvements.

Safe and accessible crossings at signalized intersections are also critical to
the safety of both pedestrians and vehicular traffic. Countdown and pedestrian
crossing heads need to be placed at all signalized intersections where
crosswalks are present. Areas that have high pedestrian crossings should
consider installing Accessible Pedestrians Signals (APS) which provide audible
cues for blind or disabled pedestrians and/or Highintensity Activated crossWalK
(HAWK) signals that force drivers to stop to allow for the safe crossing of
pedestrians. Existing APS and HAWK signals are mapped in Chapter 7.

Pedestrian infrastructure could also be improved by installing additional
pedestrian level lighting along sidewalks and around bus stops. During LRTP
public outreach events, CUUATS staff received many comments about the lack of
pedestrian-level sidewalk lighting in the community, creating unsafe conditions.
Ideally all sidewalks would have appropriate lighting to facilitate walking and
a higher level of physical activity to improve population health. The decrease
in daylight hours in the winter months presents additional lighting challenges
for walkers, as does the snow without timely clearing of paths by property
owners. The safety and access of the pedestrian network is also connected to the
safety and accessibility to public transportation, as riders must use the
sidewalk network to and from bus stops.

Finally, within Champaign and Urbana, the education, paid encouragement, and
enforcement activities identified in the Safe Routes to School Project should be
continued and expanded to ensure safe walking and biking for students who walk
or bike to school. In addition, the walking school bus program (a group of
children walking to school with one or more adults) recently implemented in Leal
School in Urbana, should be expanded to include more schools in Urbana and
Champaign. Programs like Walk and Bike to School Days should also continue to
raise awareness and encourage participation.

### Bicycles
Biking and walking have become a more viable option for travel in the urbanized
area since the last LRTP update in 2009 and will continue to be important
through 2040. As gas prices rise and active transportation options become more
popular, the demand for facilities accommodating active modes of transportation
will continue to rise. Urbana already has a bike plan in place (adopted in 2008
with an updated plan in progress scheduled for approval in 2015) and Champaign
has a Bicycle Vision as part of the Champaign Transportation Master Plan
(adopted in 2008). Both communities will continue to implement the
recommendations in each of the plans. CCRPC, using the Greenways & Trails Plan
for Champaign County, will continue to track the construction of bike and
pedestrian facilities throughout the County and will work with municipalities
and local agencies in the County to build new facilities and implement the
recommendations in the plan.

As biking for purposes other than recreation has become more popular, the need
for a well-connected and efficient network of bike lanes, bike routes,
sidepaths, and shared use paths has become greater. Agencies should maximize the
opportunities to connect new bike facilities to the existing network in a way
that makes traveling by bike safe and efficient. Two other issues may arise as
biking becomes a more popular mode of travel. The first is the increased need
for proper bike parking facilities. All three bicycle documents (referenced
above) describe the recommended types of bicycle parking to be used. Champaign
and Urbana also have bicycle parking ordinances which mandate that certain types
of development provide bicycle parking in conjunction with automobile parking.
As commuting by bicycle becomes more popular, businesses should consider having
locker rooms and showers for employees.

The second issue deals with safety and education for both bicyclists and
automobile drivers. Many bicyclists and drivers are not aware of the rules for
how to properly share the road. As more bike riders use the roadway alongside
cars, the safety of both parties becomes a concern. Opportunities for
educational outreach could include programs on local public television,
information in high school drivers’ education classes, and bike training classes
provided by the League of Illinois Bicyclists. Safety programs, like the “Light
the Night” program on campus, should be continued and expanded to provide bikers
with appropriate safety equipment such as bike lights for higher visibility.

Many cities in North American and Europe are using bike-sharing programs to
promote bicycling for local trips in order to reduce congestion and vehicle
trips on the roadway network. Many bike-sharing programs in the United States
have experienced great success and high registration numbers. Bike-sharing
programs eliminate the need for residents to own their own bicycle and also
eliminate the maintenance expenses. Currently, the university is exploring
implementing a bike-sharing program. Last spring, Neutral Cycle Workshop started
a tandem-rental project called The Big Yellow Ride. The Big Yellow Ride will
arrange with several foodand drink-based businesses in Champaign-Urbana to serve
as bike-rental stations. They are considering establishing stations in downtown
Urbana, downtown Champaign, and the University District. These three locations
are areas where additional vehicular traffic could be efficiently replaced by
bicycle and pedestrian traffic.

### Local Public Transit
CU-MTD is the main provider of transit service in the urbanized area and their
ridership and service area continues to grow each year. CU-MTD provides a
critical transportation service not only to students, faculty and staff on the U
of I campus, but also to those who utilize transit service for commuting to work
or for daily service needs. As the population in the urbanized area grows,
expanding transit service to new growth areas will be extremely important. The
CU-MTD service area is not currently coterminous with the urbanized area
boundary, which creates gaps in levels of mobility within the urbanized area.
Efforts should be made to expand the service area to be coterminous with the
urbanized area in the future to ensure service access for all residents in the.
As gas prices rise, residents who no longer wish to use personal vehicles for
travel will be looking for another mode of transportation that can transport
them to work and to other daily service needs. Transit service will fulfill this
role and play an integral part in the future transportation network for the
urbanized area.

While CU-MTD is interested in expanding transit service to meet the needs of the
urbanized area, the agency is also trying to change the relationship between
transit service and new development. CU-MTD has had great success developing
specific high-frequency corridors in areas with high ridership, making transit a
more competitive choice with driving personal vehicles. CU-MTD’s focus for the
future will be on continuing to improve mobility in the urbanized area through
street upgrades, bus stop enhancements, signal priority on roadways for transit
buses, consolidating bus stops to increase efficiency, and making improvements
to the high-capacity transit network. In addition, CU-MTD is exploring the
possibility of creating transit hubs in downtown Urbana, Savoy, and a couple
possible locations in Champaign that could function as small terminals. From
these smaller terminals there would be feeder routes serving the surrounding
neighborhoods, which will shorten transit travel time within those areas.

CU-MTD is also interested in increasing the mode share for active modes of
transportation in the urbanized area. Creating a seamless network of transit,
bicycle, and pedestrian facilities will reduce the number of vehicle trips as
well as reduce the amount of greenhouse gases being released. All CU-MTD buses
are equipped with bike racks on the front. Developing affordable and efficient
options for transportation creates a system that can be both socially and
economically equitable.

Much of the discussion surrounding the future of the transportation network in
the urbanized area revolves around sustainability and environmental
consciousness. CU-MTD is already making contributions to this effort by
replacing the older, more inefficient buses with hybrid buses. The district has
also made a point to include more efficient, environmentally friendly
technologies when updating their administrative and maintenance facilities. As
the transportation system continues to evolve, CU-MTD has served as an effective
leader in adapting to new, greener technologies.

Finally, CU-MTD will continue to work on increasing public access to
transportation information for active transportation modes using the latest
technologies and information sharing methods. Increasing the use of the
internet, text messaging services, information kiosks at bus stops, and real
time bus location information will help CU-MTD disseminate accurate real time
information to more people throughout the urbanized area which will increase
transit ridership.

CUUATS also developed a Human Services Transportation Plan (HSTP)
for the urbanized area, which brings together all the different transit and
human service providers for the purpose of better coordination of services
to avoid a duplication of efforts. In 2007, the C-U HSTP development
brought together service providers, riders, and the community at large
to address barriers to, and improve efficiency and equity of, urban area
transportation services for seniors, people with disabilities, and people
with low incomes. CUUATS staff will continue to work with transportation
and human service providers to improve accessibility, availability, and
reliability of transportation service for people with disabilities, seniors,
and low-income individuals within existing budget constraints in the
Champaign-Urbana urban areas, and to maximize the resources available
for specialized transportation needs through coordination in planning,
service delivery, and reporting. To achieve these goals, the following
strategies are being undertaken by CCRPC staff and working group
agencies: develop a transportation directory, increase the existence of
accessible taxi operators, develop a personal assistant program, conduct
employer surveys, survey demand for trip services, coordinate existing
services to reduce costs, model current and future demand for Medicaid
transportation, recruit Medicaid certified operators, diversify funding
sources, recruit volunteer drivers, hold regionalized training sessions
for drivers, and establish a regional maintenance center for specialized
paratransit vehicles.

### Intercity Public Transit
The current intercity public transit system covers many regional and
nationwide destinations for those using Illinois Terminal and designated
campus pick-up locations. It is expected that the future of ridership for
intercity public transit will grow as gas becomes more expensive and
trips using transit become a more affordable option. Intercity transit
providers to and from the urbanized area should expand destinations
and frequencies in the future to make commuting and leisure travel more
accommodating.

### Personal Vehicles
Personal vehicles make up the majority of travel on roadways in the urbanized
area. As population and employment increase in the future, the need for a safe
and efficient roadway network will become even more important. The fluctuations
in supply and demand chains for fossil fuels have changed the driving patterns
for many people in the urbanized area. When gas prices spiked in 2008, Vehicle
Miles Traveled (VMT), not only in the urbanized area but in the United States as
a whole, dropped as people could no longer afford to drive as much as they did
previously. As the urbanized area progresses toward 2040, it is likely that the
price of fossil fuels will continue to increase as demand grows and supply
shrinks. Planning for this inevitable reduction in fossil fuels is paramount,
and making the transportation network as efficient as possible will help drivers
save time and money.

In order for the roadway network to be safe and efficient, it first has to
enable mobility through good connectivity. Local roads, collectors, arterials,
and interstates all serve different functions within the network and must be
maintained to maximize efficiency. To make the arterial network, and
subsequently the rest of the roadway network more efficient, arterial streets
located in the fringe of the urbanized area such as Curtis Road, IL 130 (High
Cross Rd), Olympian Drive, and Rising Road should be used to make travel more
efficient. This system of interconnected roadways on the fringe of the urbanized
area presents several benefits to the overall transportation system by allowing
residents, freight vehicles, travelers, and other users to bypass the core
areas, making travel between municipalities safer and more efficient. The
vehicles utilizing the fringe arterial road system will reduce traffic volumes
on arterials traversing the core of the community, therefore improving mobility
for those living in or traveling through the core. The fringe roadway system
also provides more efficient routes for large trucks and freight vehicles to
keep them off local roadways in the core of the community that aren’t designed
to handle such heavy vehicles. Removing large vehicles from core roadways will
improve mobility and safety for local traffic, especially for pedestrians and
bikes. Simultaneously, the fringe road system should be designed as complete
streets in order to accommodate buses, bicycles, and pedestrians.

One way to make driving more efficient is to reduce and/or remove the factors
that cause stop-and-go traffic. Intersection controls, whether stop or signal
controlled, can cause excessive delay if they are used improperly, not
coordinated, or not timed efficiently. Signalized intersections in the urbanized
area, particularly along corridors with large strings of consecutive signals,
need to be coordinated during peak hours to create a continuous traffic flow.
Many of the corridors in Champaign-Urbana are already coordinated, but there are
still problem areas and an overall lack of coordination across jurisdictions. To
make the signalized network in the urbanized area more efficient, a traffic
signal coordination master plan should be developed to join all the area signals
under one coordination system. Studies by FHWA have shown computerized signal
coordination systems can reduce travel times by 10-20%.

Another way to make driving safer and more efficient is to construct modern
roundabouts at new or existing intersections where a signal may be warranted.
The modern roundabout has been a proven solution in many locations around the
United States as a way to reduce the number of crashes and the severity of
injuries resulting from the crashes. Modern roundabouts reduce the speed of cars
entering the intersection and eliminate the chance of head-on crashes, which
often result in the most severe injuries. Along with safety improvements, modern
roundabouts are also more environmentally beneficial. During a red light phase
at a signalized intersection, cars waiting at the light are idling, adding
greenhouse gases to the atmosphere and wasting fuel. The signals at the
intersection also require electricity to function, which uses energy and fossil
fuels. Most modern roundabouts utilize yield signs rather than signals as cars
enter, eliminating electricity use and most vehicle idling time. Studies can be
completed at specific intersections to determine if a roundabout could improve
safety or efficiency.

A third way to reduce travel time along urbanized area roadways is to comply
with access management guidelines along high capacity travel routes. Poor access
management practices along major arterials can not only result in slower travel
times, but can have a significant effect on the safety of pedestrians,
bicyclists, and drivers. Ingress and egress points to parking lots and
developments are all potential conflict points for turning vehicles, bicycles,
and sidewalk users. In 2013 CUUATS updated a set of access management
guidelines, which were adopted by all member agencies within the urbanized area
and should be followed closely when approving new development to ensure safe
access. As most arterial corridors were constructed prior to the adoption of the
original guidelines in 2001, there are corridors throughout the urbanized area
that have poor access management and it can be difficult to convince property
and business owners to update their infrastructure to accommodate the guidelines
to create better traffic flow and safer conditions for roadway users.

Not all congestion mitigation solutions result in direct improvements for
vehicles. Another way to reduce VMT, travel time, and congestion is to remove
vehicles from the roadway by adding facilities for pedestrians, bicyclists, and
transit riders. Increasing the utilization of active transportation facilities
will result in reduced congestion, fuel consumption, and greenhouse gas
emissions by reducing the number of personal vehicles on the roadway. Active
modes of transportation, such as walking and biking, also provide health
benefits. As discussed in Chapter 7, Complete Streets policies have been adopted
by CUUATS in 2012 and several local jurisdictions, which call for the
incorporation of facilities for pedestrians, bikes, buses, and other modes on
all new roadway construction projects.

Another method of removing cars from the transportation network is to continue
the car-sharing program currently established in the urbanized area. Zipcar
currently has 16 cars available at 7 different locations in Champaign, Urbana,
and on the University of Illinois campus. The program provides area residents
and students with an option for travel that reduces the need to own a personal
vehicle. Park and ride facilities can be another method to reduce the amount of
vehicles on the roadway. The establishment of park and ride facilities,
particularly in fringe areas, will help capture trips from commuters coming from
outside the urbanized area for employment as well as urbanized area residents
living on the fringe of the community.

The automobile is the most popular form of transportation in the urbanized area,
and transportation planners are always looking for ways to make the current
street network safer and more efficient for drivers and tax payers. The
aforementioned techniques demonstrate that congestion can be reduced without the
need to invest heavily in the construction of new roadways. There are smaller,
less expensive means by which improvements can be made to the existing
transportation system to decrease congestion and travel time and at the same
time make the roadway network safer for all users.

### Commercial Trucks

The commercial trucking industry provides a crucial service to almost all
businesses and industries requiring the delivery of goods. As the urbanized area
continues to grow in population and in land area, the amount of goods shipped
throughout the community will inevitably rise as well. Currently, the urbanized
area does not have designated truck routes or a truck route plan. As the number
and frequency of truck deliveries increases, the need for a future truck plan
will also increase. Without a truck route plan, additional truck traffic could
cause congestion and safety problems along the roadway network and at signalized
intersections as well as exert additional stress on smaller streets not
constructed to handle the weight.

### Rail

There are two types of rail traffic utilizing the tracks running through the
urbanized area: passenger rail and freight rail. Freight rail, the counterpart
to the commercial truck delivery system, will likely continue to be a viable and
economical way of transporting goods in and out of the urbanized area as well as
around the country in the future. As gasoline prices continue to appreciate, the
economic viability of transporting goods using commercial trucks may disappear
and be replaced by freight rail.

Amtrak continues to increase passenger ridership and frequency of trains using
Illinois Terminal and should continue to do so. Area residents voiced
appreciation for this comfortable and easy link to other regional centers. To
improve ridership for all modes utilizing Illinois Terminal, a marketing program
needs to be created to link Amtrak, CU-MTD and the various intercity transit
companies so users can quickly and easily get schedules and routing information.
Many area residents have voiced a desire for a high speed rail line from here to
Chicago for shorter travel times and to eliminate the current delays in
passenger service due to Amtrak sharing the tracks with freight lines. The
Midwest High Speed Rail Association commissioned a feasibility study in 2009 to
investigate the possibility of implementing a 220 mph high speed electric train
line through Champaign connecting Chicago to St. Louis. A high speed connection
between Champaign and Chicago/St. Louis would greatly decrease the commuting
time between the cities and would help grow the local and regional economies of
the Champaign-Urbana area and other areas in Downstate Illinois. The economic,
social, academic, and professional connections between Champaign-Urbana and
Chicago have always been strong and as active modes of transportation become
more popular, a high speed rail corridor seems more and more feasible. After
consulting with a high speed rail expert at the University of Illinois as well
as a number of high speed rail case studies around the country and globe, a high
speed rail corridor from the Illinois Terminal in Champaign to O’Hare Airport in
Chicago has been included as part of the 2040 vision, with construction starting
around 2035. It is estimated that this would have a significant increase in
population growth by 2040, and an even more significant increase in job growth.

One aspect of rail corridors that could be utilized more in the future is the
Rails to Trails program or the placement of multi-use paths alongside active or
abandoned rail lines. Rail corridors provide excellent opportunities for
recreational trails that can be accessed by pedestrians, bicyclists, inline
skaters, etc. away from roadways. The Urbana to Kickapoo Rails to Trails
project, linking east Urbana to the Kickapoo State Park in Vermilion County, is
a 26-mile recreational trail that has recently secured funding to begin
construction. The future development of this trail will provide 144 recreational
opportunities as well as a tourism destination for those wishing to enjoy the
Central Illinois scenery by foot or bike. Similar trails opportunities should be
pursued to connect Champaign to Bloomington and Champaign-Urbana to other
regional and natural attractions.

### Air Travel

Having a commercial airport within the urbanized area provides a distinct
economic advantage in securing companies looking to relocate corporate offices
or establish new ones. Willard Airport also provides air travel options for
vacationers, students, visiting faculty, and speakers at the University.
Unfortunately, the airport has been losing passengers and commercial carriers
over the last ten years. Willard Airport is currently being studied by a
recently established taskforce dedicated to better understanding options to
increase the utilization of the airport’s infrastructure and services in the
future.

In conclusion, land use patterns and demands on the transportation network will
certainly change as the urbanized area evolves into the future. The ideas and
practices listed in this chapter will help guide future growth and facilitate
changes that are sustainable and economical.
