---
title: "Environment"
date: 2018-01-31T09:24:19-06:00
draft: true
weight: 10
---
It is critical to consider the natural environment when accounting for the
short- and long-term impacts of transportation decisions. In connection with new
approaches to how we maintain and enhance the livability of our region, MAP-21
reconfirms the need to enhance the performance of transportation systems while
protecting and enhancing the natural environment as one of its primary goals.
Managing environmental resources as a group of strategic assets that are crucial
to municipal goals, important to ecosystem health, and beneficial to the region
is key to successful regional management. Key environmental assets may be
described as follows:

* Clean air: essential to both human and ecosystem health. Rivers and other
* water bodies: provide drinking water, recreation, and act as natural pollution
* filters. Biodiversity: essential for food, materials, improved quality of
* life, and increases the region’s resilience to environmental change. Forests:
* serve as watersheds, habitats, carbon sinks, leisure amenities, and tourist
* destinations. If managed sustainably, forests are also a source of energy and
* building materials. Wetlands: filter and process stormwater and waste as well
* as acting as a nursery for aquatic life.

The natural environment provides the region with several ecosystem services
which are fundamental to urban livability. In considering environmental
resources, these benefits may be managed and increased by planning
transportation networks in a way that preserves, unifies, and invests in these
natural systems.

## Air Quality
The State of Illinois’ Environmental Protection Act serves to monitor and
control the concentrations of six airborne pollutants: carbon monoxide (CO),
lead (Pb), nitrogen dioxide (NO2), particulate matter (PM10 and PM2.5), ozone
(O3), and sulfur dioxide (SO2). Additionally, ozone concentration data
pertaining to the urbanized area has been acquired from the Illinois State Water
Survey’s (ISWS) Bondville monitoring site. In the past, ozone data was obtained
from a monitoring station located at B. T. Washington Elementary School in
Champaign. However, the old school building, along with the monitoring station,
were removed in 2010. The EPA has not provided any information regarding the
installation of additional monitoring stations in the future.

**Particulate matter**, both PM10 and PM2.5, refers to a measurement of air  particle size: 10
micrometers and 2.5 micrometers respectively.  Contamination at these levels is
typically the result of chemical reactions such as vehicular combustion, power
generation, and certain industrial processes. Major components measured by the
Illinois State EPA include sulfur dioxide, carbon monoxide, and nitrogen
dioxide. The exact chemistry is complex, and particle formation is dependent on
other pollutants and atmospheric conditions. In the context of the Metropolitan
Planning Area (MPA), it is important to note that ammonia from surrounding
agricultural sources such as fertilizer and animal feed operations contributes
to the formation of sulfurous and nitrogenous particulate matter that exists in
the atmosphere such as ammonium sulfate and ammonium nitrate1.

**Ground level ozone** is not emitted directly into the air but is rather the result of chemical
reactions between the natural environment and factors such motor vehicle
exhaust, gasoline vapors, and industrial and utility emissions. Ozone is likely
to reach elevated levels on hot, sunny days in urban environments. It can also
be transported long distances by wind. For this reason, even rural areas have
the potential to experience high ozone levels2.

Previously, motor vehicles were the leading contributor of **lead emissions**
into the air. As a result of the EPA’s regulatory efforts to reduce lead in
onroad motor vehicle gasoline, air emissions of lead from the transportation
sector, particularly the automotive sector, have greatly declined over the past
two decades. Today, the leading cause of lead pollution has shifted to air
travel - specifically piston-engine aircraft operating on leaded aviation
gasoline. Likewise, stationary sources such as waste incinerators and utilities
also contribute to lead emissions within the MPA3.

Table 5.1 provides a summary of each pollutant measured by the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), alongside current national standards.
“Primary Standards” refer to air quality levels required to protect public
health with an adequate margin of safety. “Secondary Standards,” also known as
“welfare standards,” refer to air quality levels required to safeguard
visibility, comfort, animals, and property from the unfavorable effects of poor
air quality. An additional primary standard for Sulfur Dioxide (SO2) of 75 parts
per billion (ppb) for the 1-hour averaging time was added to the final EPA rule,
as of June 2, 2010.

According to the Illinois EPA, the Champaign-Urbana Urbanized Area has
maintained an overall “attainment status” for locally measured air pollutants,
despite mixed results within the region. Attainment status denotes that air
quality in a particular region meets federal air quality standards. Although
Particulate Matter (Table 5.2) and Ozone 1-hour pollutant levels (Figure 5.1)
continued to decrease and were safely below state standards, Ozone 8-hour level
measurements (Figure 5.2) were above the state standard for the second year in a
row. As a result, air quality should be improved to below attainment status for
the entire MPA in part by the reduction of overall Vehicle Miles Traveled (VMT).
Also, it would be important to install additional, strategically placed
monitoring stations to adequately track and monitor progress.

## Water Quality

Water quality information is based on the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency’s (IEPA) Biannual Integrated Water Quality Report and Section 303d Lists.
These documents offer information related to the condition of surface water in
Illinois. These surface water assessments are based primarily on biological,
water, physical habitat, and fish-tissue data collected from monitoring programs
across the state. Each designated water use is measured by whether or not the
given use is supported. Within the MPA, three uses have been observed for
various water body segments: Aquatic Life, Primary Contact, and Fish
Consumption. Respectively, these uses indicate the presence of aquatic life,
human contact for recreational use such as swimming and water skiing, and the
ability to safely consume fish. For each applicable designated use, a support
level of “Fully Supporting” or “Not Supporting” is given. “Fully Supporting”
means that the designated use is presently attained, while “Not Supporting”
means the use is not attained.

Water quality in the region has had mixed results over the past four years
(Table 5.3). Portions of the Saline Branch, Embarras River, and Kaskaskia River
have either maintained or improved their water quality over the study period.
Another portion of the Kaskaskia River went from “Fully Supporting” to “Not
Supporting” aquatic life. This trend, coupled with the continued non-support of
designated uses in six other streams, rivers, and lakes does not bode well for
water quality in the region.

The Mahomet Aquifer provides the Champaign-Urbana urbanized area with a
high-quality source of water for residential, municipal, commercial, and
industrial consumption. The aquifer is located in east-central Illinois with a
service area extending from the Indiana state line to the Illinois River.
According to the 2012 Petition to Designate the Mahomet Aquifer as a Sole Source
Aquifer, an estimated 513,700 people live within the Mahomet Aquifer service
area and 509,000 people (or 99%) are served by the aquifer. A 2009 report from
the Illinois State Water Survey shows significant drawndown trends in the
Mahomet Aquifer though no shortages are yet predicted1.
