---
title: "Health"
date: 2018-01-31T11:07:33-06:00
draft: true
Weight: 40
bannerHeading: Health
bannerText: CUUATS aims to increase understanding about the different ways physiological, social, and environmental health is connected to the transportation system by including public health data in the long range transportation planning process.  
---
CUUATS aims to increase understanding about the different ways physiological,
social, and environmental health is connected to the transportation system by
including public health data in the long range transportation planning process.
Transportation systems have well-documented connections to public health through
the ways they encourage or discourage different transportation mode choices and
land use decisions. For instance, transportation mode choices can impact
peopleâ€™s ability to get recommended levels of daily physical activity for good
health. A 2004 study published in the American Journal of Preventative Medicine
shows that as the reliance on cars increases, so does the likelihood of
obesity1. By choosing more active forms of transportation, such as walking or
biking, individuals can increase their amount of physical activity and therefore
reduce their risk of obesity (see Figure 6.1).

Figure 6.2 shows that the rates of two health conditions closely tied to low
levels of physical activity, obesity and diabetes, have risen sharply in the
United States since 1995. Those are just two of several health impacts connected
with the transportation system as a result of individual mode choice, exposure
to vehicle emissions, and/or accessibility between neighborhoods and community
resources. Such resources include jobs, schools, grocery stores, and cultural
opportunities. As physical activity and related aspects of physiological,
social, and environmental health have declined over time, it is important to
consider how transportation mode choices impact local community health.

The Champaign-Urbana Urbanized Area, like most communities in the United States,
is considered auto-centric, which means that not only do most people rely on
automobiles for getting around, a significant amount of financial and
environmental resources are devoted to building and maintaining roads and other
infrastructure to accommodate cars. As referenced in the Motor Vehicles section
of Chapter 7, approximately 72 percent of the workers in the urbanized area
drove alone to work in 2010, which did not include time spent driving alone to
places other than work like school, the supermarket, restaurants, etc. In
addition to reducing physical activity, air pollutants that result from car
emissions can impact local health. The Environment chapter of this document
describes that, while the air pollutants measured in the urbanized area met
federal air quality standards, ozone level measurements were above the state
standard for the second year in a row.

Figure 6.3 demonstrates levels of four different illnesses in Champaign County
that are impacted by the local transportation system and mode choices. Blood
pressure and diabetes both rose significantly from 1998 to 2008, and both
conditions could be improved by increased physical activity (data was not
available for blood pressure in 2012). In order to create a more sustainable
transportation system by 2040 with more active mode choices for residents to
offset the negative health impacts associated with such a dominant reliance on
automobile ownership, improving and expanding the infrastructure for walking,
biking, and public transit will be considered.

Scientific evidence in the public health literature has firmly established the
relationship between transportation mode choice and public health. In a 2010
report entitled The Hidden Health Costs of Transportation prepared for the
American Public Health Association by Urban Design 4 Health, Inc., the authors
cite several studies demonstrating differences between car-based communities and
communities that facilitate more active modes of transportation through better
support and infrastructure for walking, biking, and public transit.

Residents in communities with more options for active transportation show
significant physiological, social, and environmental improvements over residents
in car-based communities. Physiological improvements include higher individual
levels of physical activity as well as lower body weight. Active transportation
systems combined with fewer cars on the road can also lead to social
improvements such as fewer traffic injuries and increased mobility for residents
who do not own or have access to a car. For the eight percent of Champaign
County residents who do not own or have access to a car, public transportation
is an important connection to jobs, school, family and friends, food,
recreation, and medical care - all of which are essential for social well-being
and good health. Environmental improvements include lower rates of air
pollution, which can trigger asthma attacks.

The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services recommends that adults age
18-64 get at least 150 minutes of physical activity a week. For kids the
recommendation is even higher: kids ages 6-17 should get at least 60 minutes of
physical activity every day to grow and maintain a healthy body - a
recommendation which CUUATS is already working to address through the
Champaign-Urbana Safe Routes to School Project. The Champaign-Urbana Safe Routes
to School Project is a national program administered locally by a coalition of
stakeholders in which CUUATS planners work on coordinating plans, programming
events, and assisting local agencies with improving infrastructure so that kids
can get safely to and from school while connecting with their neighborhood,
improving their health, and decreasing the traffic and air pollution that comes
from cars. Since 2004, CUUATS staff has worked with 23 area schools to
facilitate sustainable and active transportation for school children through
activities that include administering and analyzing surveys, creating safe
walking route maps, and creating Safe Routes to School Plans.
{{<image src="bikers.jpg"
alt="people bike across a crosswalk"
caption="Yankee Ridge Bike to School Day, Urbana, 2013, photo courtesy of C-U Safe Routes to School Project"
position="center">}}

## Health Impact Assessment
CUUATS staff recently completed an extensive Health Impact Assessment (HIA) to
analyze the impact of transportation and the built environment on population
health in the Champaign-Urbana area. HIA is a policy analysis tool that can be
used to formalize public health considerations in planning processes. The most
direct impact of the built environment on health is in regard to levels of
physical activity, which are closely linked to obesity. Diabetes/obesity has
been identified as one of the top four health concerns in the Champaign County
community by the 2014-2016 Community Health Improvement Plan, coordinated by the
Champaign- Urbana Public Health District (CUPHD) (Figure 6.4). Moreover, obesity
has been strongly linked to heart diseases, various types of cancer, and other
cardiovascular diseases. As such, the HIA was designed to establish a robust
relationship between the built environment and the local obesity rate.

The analysis revealed that there were significant correlations between obesity
and built environment variables such as density, service accessibility, transit
connectivity, active transportation infrastructure, and more. Obesity rates were
generally lower in neighborhoods that had higher population density, better land
use mix, higher accessibility to jobs and services, and better transit
connectivity. Based on the results of the HIA, a health index was developed that
was used to rate the built environment variables of different planning areas in
terms of their impact on levels of physical activity and local health. Figure
6.5 is the summary health index map, where the higher scores represent locations
with more built environment features that are correlated with higher physical
activity and lower obesity. The detailed report outlining the methodologies and
results of the Champaign-Urbana HIA can be found in Appendix B.

An important limitation related to studying the relationships between different
health conditions and the transportation system is that correlations do not
necessarily prove causation. Many illnesses and health conditions reveal
themselves in different ways in different people and result from intersections
of multiple factors and risk modifiers. The findings of this study should not be
interpreted as asserting that the transportation system is the only factor that
determines health outcomes in the community. At the same time, scientific
evidence asserts that even small increases in active transportation could lead
to significant decreases in chronic disease and increases in overall public
health, which makes this a unique opportunity for CUUATS to facilitate positive
change in the health of the community.

## Local Accessibility and Mobility Analysis
Similar in scope to the HIA, CUUATS staff recently completed the Local
Accessibility and Mobility Analysis (LAMA) that attempts to characterize the
accessibility and mobility of different planning areas in the Champaign- Urbana
urbanized area. This was a qualitative analysis that sought to evaluate the
availability of choices related primarily to travel behavior in different
neighborhoods. The general conclusion of the analysis was that the combination
of mobility and accessibility has a significant impact on travel behavior and
transportation costs. Residents living in neighborhoods that have high
accessibility to various services (e.g. jobs, grocery stores, and other
services), and high mobility (measured in terms of availability of bus routes,
bike lanes, sidewalks, etc.) were more likely to use active modes of
transportation and have lower transportation costs. As shown in the HIA,
neighborhoods with high accessibility and high mobility had significantly lower
rates of obesity.

### Mobility and Accessibility Indices
Though individual variables provide a rich body of information about the
physical characteristics of an area, a long list of variable values can be
difficult to understand and interpret. Indices offer a way of condensing
multiple variables into a more digestible format.

In order to assess mobility and accessibility at the neighborhood level, the
built environment and transportation variables were categorized into the two
indices documented on the following page: a mobility index and an accessibility
index with the point values displayed in parentheses.

The mobility index collected variables related to the four local modes of
transportation: car, walking, bicycle and bus. These variables were combined to
assess how easily residents could move around the neighborhood using the four
modes.

The accessibility index brought together variables related to the proximity of
key destinations, such as employment centers, schools, grocery stores, parks and
service businesses. It also assessed the overall land use patterns in the
neighborhood for compatibility with access to these destinations.

As with any form of simplification, the mobility and accessibility indices
represent a particular set of assumptions and priorities. In general, variables
were weighted equally (in points) in each category, except where one was judged
to be a more reliable indicator of the mode or destination type.

The maps that follow show the combined index scores. Darker colors indicate
higher scores. A detailed report outlining the methodologies and results of LAMA
can be found in Appendix C.
