---
title: Home
date: 2017-11-21T13:50:42-06:00
draft: true
---

# Sustainable Choices 2045

The Long Range Transportation Plan (LRTP) is a federally mandated document that
is updated every five years and details how the urbanized area transportation
system will evolve over the next 25 years. The LRTP covers the Champaign-Urbana
urbanized area as delineated by the 2010 U.S. Census. It looks at a 25-year
Metropolitan Planning Area (MPA), shown on the following page, which encompasses
land outside the urbanized area that is likely to be included in the urbanized
area between the years 2015 and 2040. The LRTP looks at the projected evolution
of pedestrian, bicycle, bus transit, automobile, rail, and air travel over the
next 25 years.

This plan has a regional scope and is not meant to take the place of local
transportation plans and comprehensive land use plans. Its main purpose is to
identify major regionally beneficial transportation projects that can be
targeted for federal funding. While smaller localized transportation projects
were reviewed and taken into consideration during the planning process, the LRTP
lends itself to a broader regional focus and attempts to bring multiple
jurisdictions together under one common vision. The LRTP: Sustainable Choices
2040 focuses on increasing the mobility of area residents and the connectivity
of the entire transportation system in order to provide residents greater access
to services and facilities and to create a more efficient travel network.

As a community transportation policy document, LRTP: Sustainable Choices 2040
helps guide the direction for future investments and enhances the findings of
LRTP: Choices 2035, Champaign-Urbana’s previous LRTP. It uses improved modeling
tools and a dramatically expanded public involvement campaign to more clearly
define the region’s transportation issues and identify strategies to address
them.
