---
title: "Pillars"
date: 2018-02-01T15:11:33-06:00
draft: true
Weight: 10
---

The LRTP: Sustainable Choices 2040 has an overall mission to offer sustainable
transportation choices within the region that will help balance the economic,
environmental, and social aspects of ongoing urban change and development in the
Champaign-Urbana urbanized area. This chapter conceptualizes and explains the
planning pillars that will help define the goals and objectives set forth in
this plan, and perfomance measures (Chapter 9) that will facilitate monitoring
annual progress made toward achieving those goals and objectives.

In order to understand the future goals of local residents, CUUATS staff held a
total of four visioning meetings to capture a wide range of local input: one for
middle school and high school youth at the public library in Champaign, one for
the general public at the Illinois Terminal in Champaign, one for employees of
the Regional Planning Commission at the Brookens Administrative Center in
Urbana, and one for business developers at the Civic Center in Urbana.

The conversations at the four visioning meetings were centered around two
related questions:

What would the Champaign-Urbana region look like in 2040 if we were to do
nothing different?

What kind of changes could we make to create a better future?

While each of the four groups included distinct voices and perspectives, there
was significant overlap in the topics covered and the types of concerns about
the future. Attendees at each of these meetings talked about
transportation-specific issues, like adding more multi-use paths and a corridor
for bullet trains, but also talked about more general issues related to
community developement and social health like the negative impacts of
residential segregation and the lack of local affordable housing in the region.
In the end, most community development issues are related in some way to
transportation and impact the way we think about and plan for transportation
infrastructure in the region. Therefore all the discussion topics that resulted
from the visioning meetings are included in the analysis of the public
involvement for the LRTP: Sustainable Choices 2040 which is encompassed in the
six planning pillars described in this chapter, and around which the goals,
objectives, and performance measures are defined in Chapter 9.
{{<image src="meeting.jpg"
alt="public officials meet with young people"
caption="LRTP 2040 Youth Visioning Meeting, November 2, 2013 at the Champaign Public Library, Artist: David Michael Moore"
position="center">}}

## Sustainable Choices 2040 Planning Pillars
{{<image src="public.jpg"
alt="people write on public input boards"
caption="LRTP 2040: Existing Conditions public meeting, October 2013, Illinois Terminal, Champaign"
position="right">}}
The six Sustainable Choices 2040 planning pillars (Figure 8.5) are a result of
coalescing the results of extensive research and data collection (Chapters 2-7),
an ambitious and innovative public outreach campaign (Appendix A), and the
annual LRTP Report Cards that detail the progress made on goals and objectives
set forth in the previous LRTP, Choices 2035, approved in 2009. Each pillar is
described in detail with quotes taken directly from LRTP public input surveys
and recordings included in green text in the top right corner of each page to
help illustrate the sentiments of local residents. The visual representations of
each pillar are taken from the graphic recordings of the four LRTP visioning
meetings documented on the preceeding pages that were held around the
Champaign-Urbana area in November 2013.

## Safety and Security
Sustainable Choices 2040 lists safety and security as the first priority of the
transportation system. This pillar builds on the second and third factors of
MAP-211 to “increase the safety [and security] of the transportation system for
motorized and non-motorized users.” The concepts of safety and security include
crash data statistics, tracking and understanding regional commodity flows as
they relate to hazardous materials and potential exposure, and coordinating with
agencies in charge of emergency vehicle access. Community members also provided
input regarding the safety of streets without sidewalks or lighting in the
region, as well as a disconnected regional bike network that can make biking
unsafe in different parts of the community.

### Transportation
* Automobile crash rates per 100 million VMT are below state averages and the
state Highway Safety Performance Plan (HSPP) target, but the crash fatality rate
is still above zero.

* Vehicle-pedestrian crashes have increased since 2009 and the number of
pedestrian fatalities resulting from vehicle-pedestrian crashes remains above
zero.

* Vehicle-bicycle crashes and injuries have decreased over time, and the region
should strive to continue this trend. Fatalities from vehiclebicycle crashes
have remained low, but are still not zero.

* Traffic safety education and enforcement should be recurrent activities in the
region to enhance the safety of all road users. The Safe Routes to School (SRTS)
program has done important work in this area making sure children and adults who
spend time in schools can get there safely without a personal vehicle. However,
there is a need to get all schools in the urbanized area participating in the
SRTS programs.

* Pavement conditions in the urbanized area have remained consistent, but the
 region should strive to have fewer “poor” and “very poor” pavement conditions
 to increase safety and support all travel modes.

* Transportation security systems are well-established in the region, but would
benefit from an update to the 2005 Intelligent Transportation System (ITS)
Architecture Plan, as our ITS infrastructure is currently changing with the IDOT
investment in electronic roadway signs and other developments. The creation of a
security hazard mitigation plan would also benefit the region.

* Public input indicates that street lighting is a big indicator in how safe
people feel when walking. In a region of the country that gets fewer than twelve
hours of daylight for six months out of the year, street lighting should be a
priority to facilitate people being active and outside as often and as safely as
possible.

## Resilient Economy
This pillar came out of public input that focused on the 2008 economic downturn
and the changing nature of employment and the impacts on mobility, social
services, income disparity, home ownership, neighborhood health, and more. This
pillar builds on MAP-21 factor number one, which aims to “support the economic
vitality of the metropolitan area, especially by enabling global
competitiveness, productivity, and efficiency.” By including the qualifier
“resilient,” this pillar represents community desires to facilitate the ability
of the regional economy to continue to support a high quality of life in the
face of larger market forces by supporting existing and emerging local and
global business development, continuing to invest in forward-looking
infrastructure like fiber connectivity, establishing strong inter-regional
transportation options like bullet trains, and promoting inter-municipal
coordination. This pillar also includes community concerns regarding supporting
and growing a diverse workforce. It is important to establish quality education,
training, and employment opportunities for a wide range of interests, ages,
ethnicities, and skill levels to foster a diverse and dynamic workforce now and
in the future.

### Transportation
* Assess gaps in infrastructure and identify priority areas where potentially
small investments could result in a significant impact, such as improving
sidewalk connectivity.
* To enhance the economic vitality of the region, Willard should remain a viable
option for freight carriers and travelers with continued support of multi-modal
options to and from the airport.
* The region should identify the needs of businesses using rail and freight
trucks. The establishment of a freight plan would help the region identify local
truck routes most suited for freight traffic. The identification of regional
facilities for alternative fueling methods can also encourage more sustainable
freight trucks.
* Many people voiced a desire for bullet trains to expand options for students and
commuters in the region. Amtrak ridership has continued to increase and should
be supported regionally by increasing the number and frequency of trains to
maintain this trend.

### Land Use
* Public input indicated a shift away from detached single-family home ownership
in some neighborhoods, toward more economically and structurally diverse housing
options. In addition, the public voiced that affordable and subsidized housing
in particular need to be better integrated with the existing pedestrian, bike,
and transit network to reduce transportation costs for those households.

* Public input revealed that many people would like to see more mixed use zoning
to allow for smaller businesses and other economic opportunities within some
residential neighborhoods. Residents would also like to continue ongoing
revitalization of the downtown areas of Champaign and Urbana, as well as the
University of Illinois research park, as multimodal hubs for transportation,
employment, and services.

* To echo the Champaign Growing Greener plan published in 2013, it should be a
priority to improve the availability of locally grown foods. Growing more food
to sell locally would capitalize on the rich soil in the region, support local
farmers, and benefit population health.

* Support economic growth by undertaking a planning process that identifies
potential economic development areas in the urbanized area in order to build a
transportation system that better supports those needs. This could include
increasing local capacity, safety, accessibility, and mode opportunities through
expanded transit service, or bike access to major employment centers and
educational facilities such as Parkland Community College.

## Multimodal Connectivity
This pillar combines MAP-21 factors four, six, and seven with the intention of
providing and coordinating all transportation modes to get everywhere in our
region. By focusing on providing as much access to as many different places as
possible for all transportation modes, this planning pillar aims to increase
accessibility and mobility of people and freight to all areas of the region,
enhance the ability to connect different modes when necessary or cost-effective
for people and businesses, and to increase the resource efficiency of the
transportation system by allowing for the use of more active and non-motorized
modes whenever possible.

### Transportation
* Poor sidewalk connectivity limits walking in certain locations and could be
addressed during new development or retroactively for existing development.
Sidewalk connectivity should be systematically assessed to decrease gaps in the
sidewalk and trail system and increase accessibility to bus stops and transit
service.

* Bicycle infrastructure connectivity and accessibility remains a challenge due to
limited funding as well as physical and natural barriers. Even so, significant
progress has been made: the total mileage of bike facilities in the Metropolitan
Planning Area (MPA) has increased 57 percent since 2009, which is well above the
goal of a 15 percent increase in dedicated bike facilities and signed bike
routes by 2014 set in the previous LRTP.

* Accessibility and connectivity between buses and other modes may be facilitated
by properly signing and better equipping some stops with shelters, lighting, and
bike racks, as well as installing concrete landing pads for easier bus entry and
exit (as recommended in the CUUATS Transit Facility Guidelines).

* To accommodate growing ridership, the region should continue to strive to have
100 percent coverage of residential parcels within the C-U MTD service area and
expand the service area to be coterminous with the urbanized area as much as
possible.

* In 2004, C-U MTD investigated fixed-guideway rail lines as a potential strategy
to improve local transit service. Though a fixed-rail system was not
implemented, C-U MTD used the findings of this study to redesign the existing
transit network to accomplish some of the same goals.

* Automobiles are still the dominant form of transportation within the region.
Access management guidelines, roundabout guidelines, and a complete streets
policy were created for the region to guide regional development of automobile
infrastructure. These guidelines should be followed to help improve safety and
efficiency conditions as well as facilitate multi-modalism in the region.

* The region should identify the needs of businesses using rail and freight
trucks. The establishment of a freight plan would help the region identify local
truck routes most suited for freight traffic. The identification of regional
facilities for alternative fueling methods can also encourage more sustainable
freight trucks.

* To enhance the economic vitality of the region, Willard should remain a viable
option for freight and travelers with continued support of multi-modal options
to and from the airport.

* Many people voiced a desire for additional regional rail connections – ideally
with bullet trains. Amtrak ridership has continued to increase and should be
supported regionally by increasing the number of routes serving the community.

## Accessibility and Affordability

This pillar expands MAP-21 factor number four (to increase accessibility and
mobility of people and freight) to include affordability as it is closely tied
to many forms of accessibility. Public input reflects dissatisfaction with the
uneven distribution of businesses, housing options, and educational
opportunities between neighborhoods, which themselves are often somewhat
segregated along racial, ethnic, and/or income lines. Access to affordable and
reliable transportation is essential to widening opportunities for all people by
connecting them to jobs, schools, health care, food, and other resources.

### Transportation
* Walking or using a wheelchair on area sidewalks is a free and healthy way to
move around the community. Sidewalk conditions and access should be
systematically assessed to improve their conditions and decrease gaps in the
system.

* Bicycles are a cost-effective and healthy way to move around the community.
 Bicycle safety education and enforcement, through the Champaign-Urbana Safe
 Routes to School Project and other programs, should be recurrent activities in
 the region to enhance the safety of all road users.

* C-U MTD provides annual bus passes for only $72, presenting a much cheaper
alternative to owning and driving a car. Public input from youth indicates a
desire for an even cheaper pass or payment plan specifically for K-12 students.
All C-U MTD regular fixed routes are served by buses equipped with wheelchair
ramps that can be lowered to aid boarding. Accessibilty could be improved in
some locations by adding concrete landing pads to facilitate easier bus entry
and exit. In addition, the C-U MTD service area should be expanded to be
coterminous with the urbanized area as much as possible.

* Accessibility, availability, affordability, and reliability of transportation
for people with disabilities, seniors and low-income individuals should be a
priority. Traditionally, transit discounts have been afforded to disabled,
youth, and seniors, under the assumption that they have trouble affording basic
necessities. On the other hand, persons who qualify for a number of public
assistance programs are known to have trouble affording basic necessities and
are not necessarily provided the same discounts.

* The Champaign-Urbana urbanized area hosts Zipcar, a car sharing program that
allows program members a more affordable way to have access to a personal car
when necessary without the expense involved in purchasing, maintaining, parking,
and insuring one. More car sharing programs should be supported to reduce
congestion and car dependency while increasing alternative modes of
transportation.

* Even though road infrastructure exists to access all parts of the community,
personal automobiles are an expensive form of travel. Infrastructure for
walking, biking, and public transit should be expanded to increase access for
people who cannot afford to commute by car. Access management guidelines and a
complete streets policy were created for the Champaign-Urbana Urbanized Area to
increase safety and facilitate multimodalism.

* Sixty percent of train-related public input for this plan has shown the desire
for rail improvement in the region, including requests for bullet trains and
cheaper and more consistent Amtrak fares. Currently, a one-way trip from
Champaign to Chicago can cost anywhere between $15 and $39 for a coach seat
depending on the time of travel. Amtrak ridership has continued to increase and
should be supported regionally by providing more train frequency.

## Healthy Neighborhoods
This pillar developed out of a growing concern for the physical health of the
region’s residents, as well as public conversations about the strengths and
limitations of existing neighborhoods and housing developments. The health of
the environment is also an important factor in planning for physical health,
population growth, and future sustainability. Access to active forms of
transportation infrastructure such as sidewalks, bike lanes, and public transit
have proven to have a positive effect on combating the growing prevalence of
obesity, heart disease, and diabetes, as well as improving the environment by
reducing resource consumption. An emphasis on evaluating and expanding active
transportation infrastructure should be a priority. In addition, community
members clearly articulated a desire for more mixed use and compact development
as well as more opportunities for affordable housing, communal space, and
recreation within and between neighborhoods to reduce isolation and promote
stronger social connections. This planning pillar is related to MAP-21 factor
five, which aims to protect and enhance the environment, promote energy
conservation, and improve the quality of life in different regions.

### Environment
* Ozone 8-hour level measurements were higher than the staterecommended level for
the second year in a row in 2012. Additional air monitoring stations should be
installed in the region to track air quality with a higher level of accuracy.

* Water quality has declined in portions of the Saline Branch, Kaskaskia River and
Copper Slough since 2004, shifting from either partial or full support of
aquatic life to no support. In addition, there are currently 13 endangered and
nine threatened species located within the region. Planners and developers
should learn about measures to help protect and conserve these assets early in
the design process for new projects.

### Land Use
* The United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) has identified one low-income
Census tract in northeast Champaign and two lowincome tracts in northeast Urbana
where a substantial number or share of people have limited access to
supermarkets. Public input revealed that many people would like to see greater
walking and biking access to locations and services, including food outlets,
inside and outside their neighborhoods.

* Public input reveals that many people desire more public spaces to promote
mobility, recreation, and congregation. Multi-use paths within and between
neighborhoods would allow opportunities for community members to connect and be
active. Community gardens are another example of a land use that has been proven
to positively impact the social, environmental, and physiological health of
neighborhoods.

### Transportation and Public Health
* The rate of obesity for Champaign County has risen from 17.1 percent in 2005 to
22.3 in 2012. Obesity increases the risk of other illnesses and health problems,
including high blood pressure, diabetes, negative psychosocial effects, and
premature death. Getting the amount of daily activity recommended by the CDC
would be an efficient and cost-effective way to combat these trends. In order to
increase residents’ daily activity, local agencies should promote active
transportation by designing encouragement activities that use existing active
transportation infrastructure. In addition, efforts should be made to increase
the connectivity of the existing active transportation network and to extend
active transportation infrastructure to locations within the MPA where that
infrastructure is currently limited or non-existent.

## Balanced Development
This pillar is based on the desire of community members to support diverse and
environmentally responsible types of development without encouraging sprawl or
sacrificing important historical structures or new business opportunities. In
addition, basic services, transit to employment centers, and quality
infrastructure should be more evenly distributed across the region and
reasonably accessible from every neighborhood. Community members expressed a
clear interest in reinvigorating downtown areas by promoting urban infill, as
well as fostering more mixed use development in different parts of the urbanized
area. This planning pillar builds on MAP-21 planning factor number five to
promote growth and development in a way that maximizes valuable and limited
financial and environmental resources. In addition, this pillar reflects MAP-21
factor number eight (that emphasizes the preservation of the existing
transportation system) in that it incorporates the appreciation for existing
local assets expressed in the public input received.

### Land Use
* Gross population density decreased by an average of approximately 200 people per
square mile within the MPA since 1990. However, the decline has slowed and data
shows that both gross population and residential density have increased in MPA
municipalities since 2009. Taking steps to continue to increase population
density in order to increase efficiency in the transportation system would
respond to public input requesting more mixed use zoning in residential areas to
increase access to services within walking and biking distance.

* The public supports the continued preservation of cultural, historic, and
archeological resources in the region including residential homes and
neighborhoods.

* The agricultural sector in the larger region is likely to experience negative
and uneven impacts of climate change such as droughts, water shortages, excess
precipitation, and/or the spread of pests and diseases1. To minimize sprawl and
preserve the uniquely productive agricultural soils in our region, measures
should be in place to prioritize infill opportunities and the redevelopment of
underutilized existing developments rather than new construction on agricultural
land.

* The CUUATS Local Affordability and Mobility Analysis (LAMA) provides a picture
of the quality of life in different designated areas in the urbanized area based
on a variety of measures, including access to services, transit connectivity,
distance to public schools, housing mix, and more. This tool allows planners to
assess gaps in existing infrastructure and identify priority areas where
potentially small investments could result in a significant impact, whether it
is an added sidewalk connection or expanding transit service to a major
employment center. This index and the concepts and measures identified in this
framework should be utilized when siting investments in order to promote
balanced development and maximize resources.

### Environment and Public Health
* Also relevant for the previous pillar, Healthy Neighborhoods, the United States
Department of Agriculture (USDA) has identified one low-income Census tract in
northeast Champaign and two low-income tracts in northeast Urbana where a
substantial number or share of people have limited access to supermarkets.
Public input revealed that many people would like to see greater walking and
biking access to locations and services, including food outlets, inside and
nearby their neighborhoods.
