---
title: "Vision"
date: 2018-02-08T14:20:52-06:00
draft: true
Weight: 50
---
This chapter sets forth a vision for each mode of transportation in the
urbanized area through the year 2040. This vision is meant to be general and
reflect a regional perspective. The vision’s purpose is to encourage discussion
about how residents, travelers and local agencies can work together to in
providing a transportation network that will suit the needs of all users by the
year 2040. The vision is also meant to help define the larger land use and
transportation principles that are keys to growing a more healthy and
sustainable urbanized area.

Land use patterns, employment and population growth or decline, environmental
priorities, population health, and trends in travel patterns are all likely to
create different demands on the region’s transportation system. The LRTP:
Sustainable Choices 2040 vision for the future attempts to take these projected
changes, as well as public input and the results of the CUUATS statistical
modelling suite, into consideration to present an overall vision for the
region’s transportation network. The vision is also broken out into two
categories to make clear which transportation projects are illustrative and
which already have reasonably guaranteed funding sources, also referred to as
‘fiscally constrained.’

During the development of this vision, two separate future projections were
modeled. The first is the Traditional Development 2040 scenario, which projects
how and where development will occur between 2010 and 2040 based on historical
development trends. The second is the Sustainable Choices 2040 scenario which
projects how and where development will occur between 2010 and 2040 based on
MAP-21 performance goals, the planning pillars outlined in Chapter 8, Planning
Pillars, and public input received regarding future project priorities. Key
differences between the Traditional Development 2040 and Sustainable Choices
2040 scenarios are the development of a high speed rail corridor to Chicago in
the Sustainable Choices scenario around the year 2035, the locations and types
of residential development projected, and the increase in employment in
particular areas such as the Research Park, downtown Champaign, downtown Urbana,
etc. In the Traditional Development 2040 scenario, the overwhelming majority of
development is on the rural fringe of municipalities, while the Sustainable
Choices 2040 scenario shifts a significant portion of the expected population
growth to core areas of the community. The difference in the location of new
residents means residential density is generally higher in the Sustainable
Choices 2040 scenario.

The projects that make up the vision for this LRTP, Sustainable Choices 2040,
are a result of modeling the impact of different projects, gathering public
input regarding the project priorities in the region, and re-visiting the
projects contained in the vision of the previous LRTP, Choices 2035.

### Statistical modeling

The CUUATS modeling suite is designed to provide a holistic approach to planning
analysis through the integration of localized transportation, land use,
emission, social costs, accessiblity, mobility, and population health at the
County level and at the local level in the Champaign-Urbana area. Each model
addresses a specific area of concern at the necessary level of detail to make it
appropriate for Champaign County or the Champaign-Urbana urbanized area. The
synergy of the different models allows CUUATS planners to assess how different
population changes and development patterns will impact the transportation
system in the future. By quantifying the various impacts of potential
transportation system changes, planners are able to compare different
development scenarios as well as develop and track specific performance
measures. Overall, the models’ results show that the increased density of the
Sustainable Choices 2040 scenario reduces new infrastructure costs, saves on
resource usage, and reduces per capita emissions compared with the Traditional
Development 2040 scenario (Table 12.1). For information about the different
models and related inputs utilized in the development of the LRTP: Sustainable
Choices 2040 vision, see Chapter 11.

### LRTP 2035

Some of the projects shown in the vision maps and the fiscally constrained map
are similar to those shown in the preferred alternative from the previous LRTP
2035 approved in 2009. In 2009, CUUATS staff created a vision including 23
roadway, transit, rail, and air projects, and a long list of pedestrian and
bicycle network improvements. State and local agencies have made significant
progress on the completion of the 2035 roadway vision for the future, which is
shown in Figure 12.1 along with a status update on each project as of 2014.
Since some of the regionally significant projects from the previous plan have
not been funded or constructed as of 2014, and are still high priority projects
after being evaluated with the CUUATS modeling suite, they remained as part of
the vision for 2040, noted with ‘Choices 2035’ in the Sustainable Choices 2040
Vision project lists. Projects which have not been completed but have guaranteed
funding are included in the fiscally constrained projects lists and maps.

### Agency Priorities and Public Priorities

In June 2014, CUUATS staff conducted public outreach at 11 different locations
in the planning area. The focus of the June outreach was to have the public vote
on which transportation projects they considered the most important over the 25
year planning horizon. Public participants were given a project list from which
to choose priorities or add their own projects they thought were important to
consider for future development. The project list contained project priorities
provided by the Illinois Department of Transportation, the Cities of Champaign
and Urbana, and the Villages of Savoy and Mahomet. The Villages of Tolono and
Bondville did not submit any project priorities. The original poster listing all
42 projects that were voted on by the public can be found in Appendix A, as well
as the voting tallies. The most popular 15 projects are included on the vision
maps, noted with ‘public choice’ on the Sustainable Choices 2040 vision project
lists. Two of the public choice projects included in the 2040 vision are also
projects that have been carried over from the previous LRTP: Choices 2035
vision: a high speed rail corridor to Chicago, and an extension of Florida
Avenue east to IL130/High Cross Road.

## Sustainable Choices 2040 Vision Projects

LRTP: Sustainable Choices 2040 aims to accommodate projected population and
employment growth by focusing urbanized area transportation investments on
improving core accessibility, arterial mobility, and regional connectivity. A
conceptual map of the overall transportation vision for 2040 is shown in Figure
12.2. In the core of the community - around the City of Champaign downtown, the
City of Urbana downtown, and the University Avenue corridor connecting the
downtowns and the campus - the vision emphasizes complete streets1 to increase
accessibility and safety for active modes of transportation: walking, biking,
and transit. This includes improving connectivity for the sidewalk and bicycle
networks and also increasing the coverage and frequency of public transit. In
addition, mobility and safety can be increased by more efficiently serving some
of the current automobile and freight traffic on an enhanced arterial network.
The enhanced arterial network would be designed as complete streets to improve
auto and freight mobility while also accommodating pedestrians, bikes, and
transit. It would be connected to the core via main corridors and arterials such
as Windsor Road, Florida Avenue, University Avenue, Bradley Avenue, Lincoln
Avenue, Neil Street, Prospect Avenue, and Mattis Avenue. Regional connectivity
is represented by the existing train corridors where the vision recommends
higher Amtrak frequency and eventual installation of a separate high speed rail
corridor. In addition, the map shows the rails-to-trails project connecting east
to Kickapoo State Park and west to Bloomington, as well as vehicle access to
Interstates 57, 72, and 74.

The vision’s purpose is to encourage discussion about how residents, travelers,
and local agencies can work together to provide a transportation network that
will suit the needs of all users in the year 2040. The vision compliments and
builds on existing local plans and priorities to help define larger land use and
transportation principles that are keys to growing a more healthy and
sustainable urbanized area.

## Sustainable Choices 2040: Bicycle and Pedestrian Vision
One important goal for the future transportation network is to increase mobility
choices for all users. Increasing the use of facilities for active modes of
transportation will reduce the number of automobiles on the roadway network,
therefore reducing congestion, travel time, and greenhouse gas emissions.
Increasing the number of biking and walking trips will also benefit the health
of those travelers. As the urbanized area’s population increases, it will be
more important to shift the mode share of travelers from driving to biking,
walking, and taking transit. A reduction in the number of automobile trips will
put less stress on the existing network and reduce the amount of funding needed
for roadway improvements.

As discussed in the Future Conditions Chapter, the bicycle and pedestrian vision
for Sustainable Choices 2040 relies heavily on the successful implementation of
several local plans: the Champaign Pedestrian Plan, Champaign Bicycle Vision,
and Champaign Transportation Master Plan; Urbana’s Bicycle Master Plan, Urbana
Trails Plan; and the Champaign County Greenways & Trails Plan. These plans
identify the future locations for bicycle and pedestrian facilities in the
urbanized area. Figures 12.3 and 12.4 convey some of the plans for the Kickapoo
Rail Trail, which is one of the many pedestrian and bicycle projects included in
the 2040 vision. The pedestrian and bicycle vision map, Figure 12.5, shows
existing bicycle and pedestrian facilities, as well as those facilities that are
expected to be completed between 2015 to 2020. Projects are shown in the map
under one of three categories: Completed, Under Construction, or Not Yet
Completed. Due to the large quantity of projects, names and descriptions of the
projects are included in the Appendix D and not labelled on the map.

Other elements making up the bicycle and pedestrian vision include:

### Education

Educate all road users about road safety to facilitate better cooperation
between modes. In addition, provide training opportunities for planners and
engineers regarding facility design and standardized signage to promote an
efficient and cohesive network.

### Policy

Establish policies that promote coordination between the different agencies
involved in recreational and transportation uses of area trails and bikeways.

###Conservation

Take measures to ensure all paths are sustainably used and maintained so as to
minimize any negative environmental impacts.

### Maintenance

Establish best practices to keep all trails and bikeways in appropriate
operating condition, during all seasons, for the health and safety of users.

### Evaluation

Implement ongoing monitoring and evaluation of the trail and bikeway networks
through data collection and stakeholder surveys to ensure the networks remains
useful and enjoyable for area residents.

### Encouragement

Promote and encourage the use of the local trail and bikeway networks to ensure
residents understand the facilities and services they have access to, and the
benefits of using them.

### Enforcement

Work with local enforcement officers to assure public obedience of rules of the
road and local agency regulations, coupled with education, to ensure safety for
all roadway users.

## Sustainable Choices 2040: Transit, Rail, and Air Vision

Shifting mode share away from personal vehicles requires a strong public transit
system within the urbanized area, as well as efficient and affordable
connections to other locations and regional centers outside the urbanized area.
Local transit agencies, such as C-U MTD, have a large role to play in making the
local transit system as efficient as possible to be competitive with personal
vehicles. The vision developed for the future of public transit, rail, and air
travel provides general recommendations and some major projects that can help
promote mode shift for these modes of transportation. The transit, rail, and air
vision map is shown on the following page.

*The project numbers are used only for the purpose of locating projects
on the map, (Figure 12.10), and do not indicate level of priority.*

### 1. High Speed Rail Corridor (Public Choice and Choices 2035)
One of the biggest projects for the future of passenger rail in the urbanized
area will be the development of a high speed rail connection between Chicago and
St. Louis, using Illinois Terminal as a stop on the route. The previous LRTP,
Choices 2035, included a priority to have a preliminary corridor study funded.
Now that is completed, Sustainable Choices 2040 proposes to move forward with
the next steps and start construction by 2035 (Figure 12.6).

### 2. Increase Amtrak Frequency

Amtrak ridership has grown significantly in the past decade, and the public has
expressed appreciation for the access Amtrak provides to other regional centers.
Increased frequency of Amtrak service through the Illinois Terminal would
accommodate the increase in ridership and encourage additional riders with an
expanded time table which would further reduce the number of vehicles using
local roadways and interstates.

### 3. Multimodal Corridor Enhancement Project (Choices 2035 and MCORE)

In 2009, C-U MTD instituted high capacity transit routes to serve the core of
the urbanized area where greater transit frequency was needed. To enhance what
has already been implemented, C-U MTD was recently awarded a TIGER grant to
implement an upgraded multi-modal network of roads, on-street bike lanes, shared
lane markings, bus-only lanes, and other transit services on sections of White
St, Green St, Armory Ave, and Wright St, (see Figures 12.7- 12.9 for proposed
cross-sections).

### 4. Transit Hubs

To accommodate increased ridership while increasing service efficiency, C-U MTD
could implement small satellite terminals or mini transit hubs in strategic
locations in the community (see map) with feeder buses to more efficiently
service the surrrounding neighborhoods.

### 5. C-U MTD Service Area (Choices 2035)

It is important for C-U MTD to continue expanding its current service area to be
coterminous with the urbanized area boundary. This measure will ensure that
transit service is available to all residents in the urbanized area,
particularly for developments that may house student populations or households
that cannot afford the expenses of owning a car.

### 6. Illinois Terminal Expansion (Choices 2035)

As a multi-modal hub connecting local public transit, intercity transit, and
passenger rail, the Illinois Terminal is at capacity for the regional services
it provides. The terminal could be expanded to include additional capacity for
services as well as provide additional commercial or professional space for
terminal users and downtown Champaign. Expansion would likely be inevitable in
the event of a future high speed rail stop at the Terminal.

### 7. Willard Airport
Vision pending Willard Airport Taskforce findings.

## Sustainable Chocies 2040: Raodway Vision

The projects and ideas that make up the visions for Sustainable Choices
2040 contain illustrative projects for which funding has not yet been
identified. The visions also show how a multi-modal network that focuses
on mode shift from automobiles to active modes of transportation can
create more accessible and affordable choices for travelers in the urbanized
area. If the proposed roadway projects are implemented by the year 2040,
travelers in the urbanized area will experience better connectivity leading to
reductions in travel time, travel delay and the total amount of vehicle hours
traveled per year per person.

The following information details the various projects that comprise the
regional roadway vision for 2040. The Village of Mahomet is in the process
of reviewing and approving a transportation plan with a horizon year of
2040. Projects 25-29 have been taken from the Village of Mahomet draft
transportation plan.

Figures 12.11 and 12.12 show renderings of future conditions for the
complete street reconstruction referenced in project numbers 3 and 13 on
Rising Road and Bradley Avenue, respectively. The Rising Road rendering
of a potential future redesign comes from the Staley/Rising Road Corridor
Study written by CUUATS staff and approved in 2009. The Bradley Avenue
rendering of a potential redesign of the I-57 overpass was done by CUUATS
staff in 2014 based on the 2014 redesign of a similar overpass over I-57
on Windsor Road in Champaign. The regional roadway vision for 2040
can be seen in Figure 12.13.

*The project numbers are used only for the purpose of locating projects
on the map, (Figure 12.13), and do not indicate level of priority.*

### 1. Possible interchange location along I-74 in West Champaign (Choices 2035)

This project would provide funding for the completion of a new interchange west
of Champaign along I-74, west of the existing I-74/I-57 interchange.

### 2. Olympian Drive east of Duncan Road to Rising Road (Choices 2035)

This project is the western segment of the Olympian Drive
improvements between Apollo Drive and Duncan Road. This
extension will continue Olympian Drive west over I-74 and connect it
with Rising Road in northwest Champaign.

###3. Rising Road improvements from Cardinal Road to Curtis Road (Choices 2035)

Rising Road needs to be improved to include shoulders for bicyclists and
pedestrian facilities as part of the enhanced arterial system connecting to
Olympian Drive on the north and Curtis Road on the south of the urbanized area
(Figure 12.11). In anticipation of possible improvement needs, the City of
Champaign and CUUATS’ Technical and Policy Committees approved a right-of-way
reservation resolution reserving 150’ of right-of-way along Rising Road.

### 4. Curtis Road improvements between Staley Road and Rising Road (Choices
### 2035)

The remaining section of Curtis Road, between Staley Road and Rising Road, is
proposed to be upgraded to improve safety with multi-use trails on both sides of
the roadway.

###5. Curtis Road grade separation at US 45 (Choices 2035)

This grade separation just east of the Curtis Road and US 45 intersection will
provide a safer crossing of the railroad tracks than the current atgrade
crossing. This improvement will also compliment other recent and proposed Curtis
Road improvements.

###6. Curtis Road Corridor Study between First Street and IL-130 (Choices 2035)

This section is proposed for a Corridor Planning Study to determine a
context-sensitive design that will increase safety for all road users while
remaining compatible with adjacent land uses.

###7. IL-130/High Cross Road widening with medians from Florida
Avenue to Curtis Road (Choices 2035)

This project involves reconstructing the segment of IL 130 between Florida
Avenue and Curtis Road. No specific road design is being proposed at this time.
The section of IL 130 from University Avenue to Windsor Road is currently being
reconstructed as a four-lane section with medians.

###8. Florida Avenue extension to IL-130/High Cross Road (Choices 2035 and
###Public Choice)

Florida Avenue does not currently intersect with IL-130 forcing traffic to use
other east/west roadways such as Washington Street or Windsor Road for access to
IL-130. Extending Florida Avenue will provide a more efficient connection for
all modes. Adjacent development will assist in funding this extension.

###9. Possible interchange location with I-74 in East Urbana
(Choices 2035)

This project would provide funding for the completion of a new interchange just
east of Urbana along I-74.

###10. Preservation of rural roadway character (Choices 2035)

IL- 130/High Cross Road Corridor Study recommendations for High Cross Road
between University Avenue north to Olympian Road and for Olympian Road between
High Cross Road and US 45 include repaving and adding wider paved shoulders to
accommodate bicyclists while still preserving the rural character of the area.

### 11. Olympian Drive extension from Lincoln Avenue to US 45 (Choices 2035)

This portion of Olympian Drive is proposed as a fourlane section with off-street
bike and pedestrian facilities. The section of Olympian Drive between Apollo
Drive and Lincoln Avenue has received federal and state funding for engineering
and construction, but the remaining portion from Lincoln Avenue to US 45 hasn’t
received funding.

###12. I-57/I-74 interchange reconstruction (Public Choice)

This project would replace the clover-leaf interchange (which are no longer
compliant with modern safety standards) with an upgraded interchange. A redesign
option has been selected by IDOT and approved by the Federal Highway
Administration (FHWA).

### 13. Bradley Avenue over I-57 structure replacement (Public Choice)

This project proposes replacing this structure as a complete street to include
bike and pedestrian facilities to increase safety (Figure 12.12).

###14. Prospect Avenue congestion mitigation from Springfield Avenue to Bradley
###Avenue (Public Choice)

This section of Prospect Avenue emerged as a weakness in the transportation
system during the LRTP public outreach. People complained about congestion
and/or access for all modes of travel in this area.

###15. IL 10/Springfield Avenue and Mattis Avenue intersection safety
###improvements (Public Choice)

This is a large intersection with high traffic volumes and a high number of
crashes relative to other intersections in the urbanized area. This project
proposes implementing intersection improvements targeted at improving automobile
traffic flow and safety conditions for all modes. A study needs to be completed
to determine the type of improvements needed.

### 16. Duncan Road complete street widening from Springfield Avenue to Kirby
### Avenue (Public Choice)

Significant residential growth has taken place along and around Duncan Road
between Springfield Avenue and Kirby Avenue creating higher traffic volumes than
in the past. This project would improve Duncan Road to include bike and
pedestrian facilities (complete street) and possibly additional automobile
lanes.

###17. Kirby Avenue over I-57 structure replacement (Public Choice)

This project proposes replacing this structure as a complete street to include
bike and pedestrian facilities to increase safety.

### 18. Windsor Road complete street widening from Mattis Avenue to Duncan Road
### (Public Choice)

This section of Windsor Road narrows from four lanes to two lanes west of Mattis
Avenue. This project would widen Windsor Road to include bike and pedestrian
facilities (complete street) and possible additional vehicle lanes.

### 19. Mattis Avenue complete street widening from Windsor Road to Curtis Road
### (Public Choice)

This section of Mattis Avenue currently narrows to two lanes south of Windsor
Road. This proposed project would widen Mattis Avenue to include bike and
pedestrian facilities (complete street) and possible additional vehicle lanes.

### 20. St Mary’s Road complete street resurfacing and road diet from Neil
### Street to Fourth Street (Public Choice)

This project would upgrade St. Mary’s Road to include facilities for all modes
including installing bike lanes and sidewalks where there aren’t any currently.

###21. - 24. Complete street reconstruction for Green Street from Neil Street to
###Fourth Street and Wright Street to Race Street; White Street from Second
###Street to Wright Street; Wright Street from White Street to Armory Avenue;
###and Armory Avenue from Wright Street to Fourth Street, (MCORE)

In 2009, CU-MTD instituted high capacity transit routes to serve the core of the
urbanized area where greater transit frequency was needed. To enhance what has
already been implemented, CU-MTD was awarded a federal TIGER grant in 2014 to
implement an upgraded multi-modal network of roads including on-street bike
lanes, shared lane markings, bus-only lanes, and other transit services.

###25. IL 47 Improvements (Mahomet)

Separate turn lanes at I-74, Franklin Street, Main Street, and US 150.

###26. IL 47 Improvements (Mahomet)

Complete the three-lane pavement section on IL 47/Division Street from US 150 to
Mid- American Road.

###27. Prairie Road Improvements (Mahomet)

Separate turn lanes at Golf Drive and Tin Cup Drive. Improve I-74 exit ramps.

###28. US 150 Improvements (Mahomet)

Turn lanes at Turkey Farm Road and Main Street. Complete three lane section from
Turkey Farm Road to IL 47/Division Street. Realign the intersections of Main
Street with US 150 and State Street with Franklin Street.

###29. State Street Improvements (Mahomet)
Provide three lanes on State Street from Crowley Road to Franklin Street.
