---
title: "Land Use"
date: 2018-01-30T14:31:25-06:00
draft: true
Weight: 10

---
Land use and planning principles are critical to understanding the impact of
future transportation investments. The coordination of land use and
transportation development requires the assessment and evaluation of how land
use decisions both affect the transportation system and increase viable options
for people to access opportunities, goods, services, and other resources to
improve their quality of life. This requires an awareness of the effects that
existing and future transportation conditions may have on land use development
demand, choices, and patterns.

Measuring land use density over time can indicate the ways in which different
municipalities grow, but measuring density alone does not provide a complete
picture of the ways in which different municipalities grow and plan for future
development. Due to municipal annexations for the purposes of planning and
future development, even municipalities with intentions of efficient, compact
development could have vast undeveloped acreages within their corporate limits
that make density measures appear incongruous with current development practices
or future development goals. Population density and residential are both
documented in this chapter in order to capture a more accurate picture of how
each municipality is developing. For a more in-depth picture of local growth
practices and policies, see planning documents specific to each municipality.

Effective coordination of land use and transportation planning and development
can produce policies, principles, and strategies intended to preserve and
enhance valued natural and cultural resources and facilitate healthy,
sustainable communities and neighborhoods. This type of coordination can also
foster an efficient balance of mixed uses, such as housing, education,
employment, recreation, retail, and service opportunities, to maximize the
benefits of geographic proximity.

### Population Density
Population density is compared for all cities and villages within the
Metropolitan Planning Area (MPA) over a 20-year time span. The analysis was
performed through a measure of gross municipal density for the years 1990, 2000,
and 2010 using Decennial Census data. On average, municipal population density
within the MPA decreased by about 200 people per square mile between 1990 and
2010. The largest decreases were observed in Champaign, Urbana, and Mahomet,
with approximately 650, 575, and 275 fewer people per square mile, respectively.
A smaller density decrease of 35 people per square mile was observed in Tolono,
while Bondville’s density grew by 286 and Savoy remained relatively constant
with an increase of 4 people per square mile. Historic data from 1990 to 2010
are shown in Figure 4.1.

Residential population density was compared for Champaign, Urbana, Bondville and
Savoy in the urbanized area through a measure of gross residential density for
the years 2007-2011 using data from RPC’s State of the County 2010 Report, the
Champaign County Tax Assessor’s parcel data, the 2010 Decennial Census and the
American Community Survey. This information was not available for Tolono and
Mahomet, but will be tracked and compiled annually as these municipalities’
participation in regional transportation planning within the MPA evolves.

Residential density change from 2007 to 2012 is shown in Figure 4.2. Notably,
there was significant land area increase from 2007 to 2008 in Champaign, Urbana
and Savoy which was a contributing factor to the indicated decline in the
density. Residential densities in each municipality have increased overall since
2008.
