---
title: "Funding"
date: 2018-02-08T14:36:50-06:00
draft: true
Weight: 60
---
The 25-year vision for the urbanized area transportation system is defined, in
part, by how much money there is to fund the infrastructure projects needed to
realize it. Ideally, the ability of the long range transportation planning
process to identify collective transportation goals (Chapter 8) for the future
will allow the individual jurisdictions within the planning area to maximize
their limited public resources by working together to accomplish these goals.
This chapter will detail existing revenue sources and expenditures for the
transportation system as well as document how staff and local agencies projected
revenues for the 25-year planning horizon.

Predicting future revenues is a somewhat elusive exercise, especially given the
recent economic recession affecting our region, the State of Illinois, and the
nation as a whole. By federal law, the LRTP must include lists of future
transportation investments within the urbanized area that are “fiscally
constrained,” which means that they have reasonably guaranteed funding sources.
Specifically:

The LRTP must include a financial plan that demonstrates the consistency of
proposed transportation investments with already available and projected sources
of revenue. The financial plan shall compare the estimated revenue from existing
and proposed funding sources that can reasonably be expected to be available for
transportation uses, and the estimated costs of constructing, maintaining and
operating the total (existing plus planned) transportation system over the
period of the plan. (23 CFR 450.322)

In order to address this requirement, this chapter will focus exclusively on the
projects, agencies, and federal funding sources that directly impact the
transportation system in the urbanized area despite the fact that the
metropolitan planning area includes additional land and an entire municipality
(The Village of Mahomet) outside the urbanized area. The Village of Mahomet and
other non-urbanized land that falls within the MPA boundaries receive separate
transportation funding specifically designated for non-urbanized areas.

There are two basic categories for transportation spending:

1. Operations and Maintenance – keeping the existing transportation
infrastructure in good operational standing through resurfacing, reconstruction,
and repairing as periodically needed

2. Expansion – creating new transportation infrastructure to increase access for
additional transportation modes or for all modes to additional locations.

Securing funding for expansion projects also means the need to increase the
operations and maintenance budget to accommodate the ongoing upkeep of
additional transportation infrastructure. In order to effectively choose where
and how roadways are resurfaced, upgraded, or expanded it is important to use
asset management practices, such as life cycle cost analyses, to maximize
transportation funding resources, including taxpayer dollars.

## Revenues

### Federal

On July 6, 2012, President Obama signed into law the current federal
transportation legislation, Moving Ahead for Progress in the 21st Century
(MAP-21), to support the maintenance of the country’s existing transportation
infrastructure and guide future growth and development of the transportation
network. The Federal Highway Administration works with local stakeholders to
ensure that individual communities are able to both maintain and construct safe,
multimodal, sustainable transportation projects ranging from passenger rail and
public transportation infrastructure to bicycle and pedestrian facilities.

Federal transportation grants require different levels of local matching funds,
ranging from 10% to 50%. The five main funding sources currently available
through MAP-21 are as follows:

* National Highway Performance Program - NHPP
* Surface Transportation Program - STP(U), STP(R)
* Congestion Mitigation and Air Quality Improvement Program - CMAQ
* Metropolitan Planning Program - MPP
* Highway Safety Improvement Program - HSIP

### State
The Illinois Department of Transportation (IDOT) receives funding from the state
to maintain its highways and is also charged with distributing federal funding
from the aforementioned MAP-21 Programs to the state Metropolitan Planning
Organizations (MPO). The allocation for each MPO is based on urbanized area
population. Most state funding allocated to projects in the urbanized area
require at least a 20% local match from an MPO member agency or outside source
such as a private party.

IDOT also collects revenues at the state level and disperses transportation
funding for expansion and improvement projects; these funds also require a
minimum 20% local match. For example, the state Motor Fuel Tax (MFT) is derived
from the purchase of gasoline and diesel. MFT monies are distributed by IDOT to
counties, townships, and municipalities for use in transportation-related
expenditures.

In 2009 Governor Quinn implemented the Illinois Jobs Now! (IJN) Program, which
provides funds for transportation infrastructure that supports economic
development opportunities. Area municipalities have benefitted from these
additional funds for a variety of projects. However, since fiscal year 2015 will
be the last year IJN funding will be awarded, they do not constitute any impact
on future budget considerations.

The Illinois Department of Natural Resources (IDNR) also provides funds for
greenways and trails projects with a required local match. Many local bike paths
and trails have been funded, in part, by IDNR.

### Local
Transportation projects receive local funding through municipal and county
budgets, local MFT, public transit fares, local park district budgets (for
greenways and trails projects), the University of Illinois, and private
donations.

## Forecasting Revenues
CUUATS staff estimated revenues for the 25-year planning horizon on a
source-by-source basis, as each funding source has a different level of
guarantee in the funding it could provide. As with most projections about the
future, uncertainty increases as they move farther out in the planning horizon.
Funding for transportation projects is complex at all levels of planning and
government. The funding projections shown in this chapter are based on five-year
averages from years 2010 to 2015, as well as future growth rates provided by the
different agencies involved.

One of the most pressing funding uncertainties has to do with the current Motor
Fuel Tax (MFT) revenue system that provides much of the transportation funding
at the local level as well as the state and federal levels. The Motor Fuel Tax
is type of user-based fee wherein an excise tax is imposed on the sale of motor
fuel in order to fund transportation system maintenance and improvements for
motor vehicles. The federal motor fuel tax of $0.184/gallon has not been
increased to keep up with inflation or increasing construction costs since 1993.
In addition, the number of US residents driving has been steadily decreasing
over the past decade, which means MFT revenues have been gradually decreasing as
well. The environmental benefits of increasing fuel efficiency in motor vehicles
has also proven detrimental to the MFT revenue stream in that drivers are no
longer required to contribute MFT dollars at the same levels as they did in the
past since they can operate their vehicles on increasingly smaller amounts of
fuel.

To begin to address these funding shortfalls, both the Cities of Champaign and
Urbana have imposed an additional $0.04/gallon Motor Fuel Tax at the local
level, but the decrease in overall revenues continues to grow. There are many
different strategies being tested around the country to address this funding
predicament, including mileage based user fees, local sales taxes,
public-private partnerships, infrastructure banks, shortterm federal
discretionary grants, and additional toll roads. It is unknown at this time if
any of these revenue sources will replace MFT revenues at the local, state,
and/or federal levels.

### Federal
Federal funding fluctuates yearly, often differing by millions of dollars. In
order to provide a reasonable estimate, four different forecasts were completed
based on different program funds:

1. All federal program funds, with the exception of STP-U Local dollars and
transit funding, were calculated for the FY 2015-2018 Transportation Improvement
Program (TIP). The four-year anticipated funding level was $24,871,800.

2. In order to determine the remaining 21 years of federal funding, an average
was taken of the previous five years’ (FY 2010 through FY 2014) federal funding
allocations. A 4% annual inflation rate was applied to funding each year over
the 21-year period. The 21-year estimate for federal funding, not including the
STP-U Local and transit apportionment, would be $281,629,131.

3. STP-U Local funding was calculated by multiplying the FY 2014 apportionment
by 25. An annual inflation rate of 4% was added to the funding allocation for
each year during 25 year projection. The estimated 25-year allocation will be
$49,898,421.

4. The Champaign-Urbana Mass Transit District estimates there will be
$90,000,000 available in the next 25 years through FTA Formula Capital funds,
which are used for fleet expansion and replacement.

**Total for all Federal programs: $446,399,353**

###State

The forecast for future state funding is composed of three steps: total annual
state-only funds allocated for projects in the FY 2015-2018 TIP, projected
state-only funds available for FY 19-40 based on the FY10- 14 average, and total
annual funds allocated for projects in the TIP FY 15-18 by the Illinois
Department of Natural Resources.

1. Total state-only funds allocated for projects in the FY 2015-2018 is
$12,771,250.

2. To estimate state funds allocated for the subsequent horizon years, an
average was taken for operations/maintenance funds projects from FY2010-2014,
then multiplied by 21 with a 4% annual inflation. (Since Illinois Jobs Now!
(IJN) was a temporary funding program that expires in FY2015, IJN funds were
excluded from the FY2010- 14 average). The estimated 21-year state funding, not
include IJN funding, would be $154,597,944.

3. Funding from the Illinois Department of Natural Resources is not a fixed part
of the annual budget; rather, it is based on the approval of intermittent grant
applications. The only reasonably guaranteed funding from this source is that
which would be listed in the current TIP. At this time, estimated IDNR funding
is $30,000 from FY2015-40.

**Total for all State programs: $167,399,194**

### Local

For the purpose of forecasting, local funding was calculated for each agency
that contributes to the local transportation system.

1. In calculating municipal contributions, the FY 2015-2018 TIP was used to
estimate the first four fiscal years. For fiscal years 2019 through 2040,
municipalities were asked to provide local budget estimates, as well as Motor
Fuel Tax revenue estimates. Local budget estimates are limited to funding spent
for transportation improvements, operations, and maintenance. Municipal staff
also provided yearly growth rates.

* An annual growth rate of 1% was applied to funding for the City of Champaign
 between 2019-2040 for an estimated total of: $233,426,138

* An annual growth rate of 0% was applied to the operations and maintenance
funding for the City of Urbana from 2019-2040 for an estimated total of:
$59,800,000

* An annual growth rate of .6% was applied to overall transportation funding
revenues for the Village of Savoy for an estimated total of: $36,441,100

* The Village of Tolono does not have any official long-range plan for
transportation project funding. However, $72,000 is listed for annual street
maintenance in the FY2015-2018 TIP. CUUATS staff took the FY 2015 budget and
multiplied it by 25 to project the possible 25 year funding total if funding
remains at its current level for an estimated total of: $1,800,000

* The Village of Bondville does not have any official long-range plan for
transportation project funding. No reasonably guaranteed funding is anticipated
from this municipality.

The projected total future revenues for the 25-year planning horizon available
for the City of Champaign, City of Urbana, Village of Savoy, and Village of
Tolono are $329,667,238.

Champaign County contributions within the urbanized area are on a projectby-
project basis. Only those projects that have established agreements with the
County for urbanized area transportation projects, as documented in the FY
2015-2018 TIP can be considered reasonably guaranteed. At this time, estimated
funding from the County is $1,100,000 for the 25-year planning horizon.

The Champaign-Urbana Mass Transit District receives an allocation from the state
and uses its local revenues to cover operations and maintenance for its system.
CU-MTD estimates that there will be $977,900,000 in revenues that will fully
cover operations and maintenance for the 25-year planning horizon. CU-MTD staff
applied an average annual growth rate of 0% over the next 25 years.

The University of Illinois has no reasonably guaranteed funds for transportation
improvements or maintenance with the exception of what is listed in the FY
2015-2018 TIP. Estimated funding from this source based on the TIP is $740,000.

The University-owned Willard Airport in Savoy reported $2,500,000 in revenues
for FY 2015. Staff at the University was unable to provide a formal projection
to the year 2040 due to the uncertainty of airline travel and airline funding in
the future. CUUATS staff took the FY 2015 budget and multiplied it by 25 to
estimate funding for the planning horizon if current funding remains the same
for an estimated total of: $62,500,000.

Another source of local funding for transportation projects is private sources.
The only reasonably guaranteed monies from this source are found in the FY
2015-2018 TIP, where there are currently no projects that will be partially or
fully financed with private funds.

**Total for all Local programs: $1,373,707,238**

To operate, maintain, and expand our local area transportation network, total
revenues have been estimated to be $1,987,505,785 between the years 2015 and
2040. Table 13.1 shows the budget summary for each agency.

## Fiscally Constrained Projects for 2040

As part of the LRTP, the Federal Highway Administration requires a listing of
the fiscally constrained projects that are part of the overall vision for the
urbanized area. The fiscally constrained projects are those that have either
guaranteed or reasonably guaranteed funding secured for the completion of the
project. Although there are no fiscally constrained projects in the Sustainable
Choices 2040 Vision, there are many local projects listed in the fiscally
constrained Transportation Improvement Program (TIP), created by CUUATS staff
and its member agencies. Additionally, the fiscally constrained Capital
Improvement Plans (CIP) created by the City of Champaign and City of Urbana
identify infrastructure maintenance and improvement projects, typically for a
10-year time period. The TIP document will be used to determine the project list
for the first four fiscal years (2015-2018) of the 25-year planning horizon for
roadway projects. The CIPs will be used to determine the project list for fiscal
years five through nine (2019-2023). The 2010-2015 State Highway Improvement
Program will be used to determine state projects that fall within the urbanized
area boundaries. The fiscally constrained roadway projects are mapped in Figure
13.1 and listed in Tables 13.2 to 13.12.

Bicycling and walking projects were identified separately from roadway projects
using the Champaign County Greenways and Trails Plan, the City of Urbana Bicycle
Master Plan and the City of Champaign Transportation Master Plan. CUUATS staff,
in conjunction with local agency staff, identified the fiscally constrained
projects from these three plans for the years 2010-2015 to show which bicycle
and walking projects have reasonably guaranteed funding over the next five
years. The costs listed for each project reflect the total cost and not
necessarily the costs associated to the agency listed. Some of the projects
involve multiple agencies, and cost-sharing agreements will be put in place.
These projects are shown in Table 13.13 as well as in Figure 13.2.

The implementation of the local projects described in the following tables are
not the responsibility of CUUATS or the Champaign County Regional Planning
Commission. These projects have been included in the LRTP to highlight local
improvement projects that will enhance the quality of the overall transportation
network and will help connect the local transportation network to the planned
regionally significant improvements for the future.
