---
title: "Planning Pillars"
date: 2018-02-01T15:11:33-06:00
draft: true
Weight: 10
---

The LRTP: Sustainable Choices 2040 has an overall mission to offer sustainable
transportation choices within the region that will help balance the economic,
environmental, and social aspects of ongoing urban change and development in the
Champaign-Urbana urbanized area. This chapter conceptualizes and explains the
planning pillars that will help define the goals and objectives set forth in
this plan, and perfomance measures (Chapter 9) that will facilitate monitoring
annual progress made toward achieving those goals and objectives.

In order to understand the future goals of local residents, CUUATS staff held a
total of four visioning meetings to capture a wide range of local input: one for
middle school and high school youth at the public library in Champaign, one for
the general public at the Illinois Terminal in Champaign, one for employees of
the Regional Planning Commission at the Brookens Administrative Center in
Urbana, and one for business developers at the Civic Center in Urbana.

The conversations at the four visioning meetings were centered around two
related questions:

What would the Champaign-Urbana region look like in 2040 if we were to do
nothing different?

What kind of changes could we make to create a better future?

While each of the four groups included distinct voices and perspectives, there
was significant overlap in the topics covered and the types of concerns about
the future. Attendees at each of these meetings talked about
transportation-specific issues, like adding more multi-use paths and a corridor
for bullet trains, but also talked about more general issues related to
community developement and social health like the negative impacts of
residential segregation and the lack of local affordable housing in the region.
In the end, most community development issues are related in some way to
transportation and impact the way we think about and plan for transportation
infrastructure in the region. Therefore all the discussion topics that resulted
from the visioning meetings are included in the analysis of the public
involvement for the LRTP: Sustainable Choices 2040 which is encompassed in the
six planning pillars described in this chapter, and around which the goals,
objectives, and performance measures are defined in Chapter 9.

## Sustainable Choices 2040 Planning Pillars
The six Sustainable Choices 2040 planning pillars (Figure 8.5) are a result of
coalescing the results of extensive research and data collection (Chapters 2-7),
an ambitious and innovative public outreach campaign (Appendix A), and the
annual LRTP Report Cards that detail the progress made on goals and objectives
set forth in the previous LRTP, Choices 2035, approved in 2009. Each pillar is
described in detail with quotes taken directly from LRTP public input surveys
and recordings included in green text in the top right corner of each page to
help illustrate the sentiments of local residents. The visual representations of
each pillar are taken from the graphic recordings of the four LRTP visioning
meetings documented on the preceeding pages that were held around the
Champaign-Urbana area in November 2013.

## Safety and Security
Sustainable Choices 2040 lists safety and security as the first priority of the
transportation system. This pillar builds on the second and third factors of
MAP-211 to “increase the safety [and security] of the transportation system for
motorized and non-motorized users.” The concepts of safety and security include
crash data statistics, tracking and understanding regional commodity flows as
they relate to hazardous materials and potential exposure, and coordinating with
agencies in charge of emergency vehicle access. Community members also provided
input regarding the safety of streets without sidewalks or lighting in the
region, as well as a disconnected regional bike network that can make biking
unsafe in different parts of the community.

### Transportation
* Automobile crash rates per 100 million VMT are below state averages and the
state Highway Safety Performance Plan (HSPP) target, but the crash fatality rate
is still above zero.

* Vehicle-pedestrian crashes have increased since 2009 and the number of
pedestrian fatalities resulting from vehicle-pedestrian crashes remains above
zero.

* Vehicle-bicycle crashes and injuries have decreased over time, and the region
should strive to continue this trend. Fatalities from vehiclebicycle crashes
have remained low, but are still not zero.

* Traffic safety education and enforcement should be recurrent activities in the
region to enhance the safety of all road users. The Safe Routes to School (SRTS)
program has done important work in this area making sure children and adults who
spend time in schools can get there safely without a personal vehicle. However,
there is a need to get all schools in the urbanized area participating in the
SRTS programs.

* Pavement conditions in the urbanized area have remained consistent, but the
 region should strive to have fewer “poor” and “very poor” pavement conditions
 to increase safety and support all travel modes.

* Transportation security systems are well-established in the region, but would
benefit from an update to the 2005 Intelligent Transportation System (ITS)
Architecture Plan, as our ITS infrastructure is currently changing with the IDOT
investment in electronic roadway signs and other developments. The creation of a
security hazard mitigation plan would also benefit the region.

* Public input indicates that street lighting is a big indicator in how safe
people feel when walking. In a region of the country that gets fewer than twelve
hours of daylight for six months out of the year, street lighting should be a
priority to facilitate people being active and outside as often and as safely as
possible.
